<strategyguides>
<walkthru>**Starship Titanic FAQ/Walkthrough Version 2.01**
#################
Table of Contents
#################
I. Introduction
II. Non-Gameplay Frequently Asked Questions
--SPOILERS BELOW--
III. Gameplay Frequently Asked Questions
IV. Walkthrough
  Introduction
  Mother
  Disarming The Bomb
  Upgrading to 2nd Class
  The Broken Elevator
  E-Mail
  The Parrot's Pistachios
  Upgrading to 1st Class
  Chevron TV
  The Titanic Titillator
  "Don't Touch That"
  Making Music
  The Parrot's Chicken
  A Change in the Weather
  Putting Titania Back Together
  Going Home
V. Fun Things to Talk About
VI. Conclusion/Administrivia

I. Introduction
###############
Welcome aboard the Starship Titanic... The Ship That Cannot Possibly Go Wrong.

Unfortunately, something has gone very wrong, and it's up to you to not only
find out what has gone wrong, but to fix it and get back home in one piece.

This document covers a few trivial points, answers a few Frequently Asked
Questions, and provides a full walkthrough of the game.  Everything beyond
section II can be considered "spoilers" which may just ruin the game for 
you if you're not careful.  

If you've got questions that this file doesn't address about the gameplay,
contact me at cjayc@gamefaqs.com, and I'll see what I can do!  This doc will
probably keep expanding over the next few months, so keep checking back if
you're interested.  Keep in mind that if you mail me with a question that is
clearly answered in this file, it will be swiftly deleted.

II. Non-Gameplay Frequently Asked Questions
###########################################

"So, is Starship Titanic a text adventure?"
No, it's a graphic adventure with a text interface for talking to various
characters in the game.  I'm surprised that someone hasn't come up with it 
before, to be honest.  It is possible to complete the game with only typing
four or five sentences total, but only if you use a walkthrough such as this
one.  Part of the challenge of the game is asking the right questions of the
various Bots to figure out how to solve the various puzzles and problems.

"Where can I find more information about the game?"
Try the official website, http://www.starshiptitanic.com, or the the site of
its creators, The Digital Village, at http://www.tdv.com.  Simon & Schuster
Interactive, who distributes the game, can be found at http://www.simonsays.com.

"Will reading the book ruin the game for me?"
Not really.  The book doesn't give away any of the game's puzzles, but it does
make things a lot clearer (i.e. you have a very good idea what happened to the
ship).  The book's plot is quite different from that of the game, although the
basic premise of the ship and its inhabitants is identical.  BTW, although the
game was written by Douglas Adams, the author of the book is actually Terry 
Jones, who performs the voice of the Parrot in the game.

"Who is this Douglas Adams person, anyway?"
He's the author of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, which initially started
out as a BBC radio program before spawning a 5-book trilogy, TV show, a text
adventure game from Infocom, a comic book, a movie (coming soon), and a whole
slew of other neat-o stuff.  The Starship Titanic concept began as a single 
paragraph in one of the Hitchhiker's books, and evolved into the game several
years later.  Having now met him twice, and being in posession of a signed 
instruction book, I can verify that he's also quite tall.

"Is that John Cleese doing the voice of the bomb?"
If you look in the credits in your instruction book, you'll see that the voice
was done by another gentleman by the name of Kim Bread.  

"What are the 3D glasses for?"
They're punishment for people who end their sentences with a preposition.  
Actually, there's a time and place to use them, and when you find it, it will 
be very, very obvious.

III. Gameplay Frequently Asked Questions
########################################

"How do I solve all of these puzzles?"
This isn't your standard adventure game, in case you hadn't figured it out.
Every puzzle has hints, and there's one person who will always give them to
you: The BellBot.  When you're stuck, ring for the BellBot, and ask away.  It
may help you to adjust his settings to make him a little easier to work with,
but practically every answer to every puzzle can be found by interrogating him.
The BellBot doesn't have all the answers; the DeskBot and BarBot are very 
helpful when it comes to gossip and hints about the drink, respectively.

"How do I find my room?"
Use your PET to look at your Designer Room numbers; it'll tell you what elevator 
you have to take, the floor number to take it to, and your room number.  When 
you stand in front of a door, the Designer Room Number panel of your pet will 
tell you which room it is.  In SGT class, you can look up and click on the doors 
to discover what room it is.  In SGT and second class, you will probably have 
to take an elevator to the top.

"What are those little dials on the side of the PET?"
The top dial is the robot's disposition towards you, and indicates whether or 
not the Bot is likely to help you out.  The middle dial is the robot's Cellpoint 
settings.  This appears to be the functionality of the robot, and determines 
what the robot is capable of.  The bottom dial?  This appears to be that 
robot's current usefulness.  It's kind of random (except for the BarBot), and
you'll get some very interesting responses when it's low.

"What do the sculptures do?"
They adjust the robot's settings.  Each sculpture corresponds to a different 
robot.  The parrot can give you hints on which is which, in case you can't tell 
just by looking at them.  When you approach a sculpture, the PET will move to 
the Robot Talk panel, and the dials become visible.  To make a robot more 
helpful, just adjust it.  The DeskBot, BellBot, DoorBot, and LiftBot all have 
two controls (Disposition and Cellpoint), where the BarBot has all three.  The 
Maitre'D bot's has no settings, but he's in shambles anyway.  The sculpture in 
the middle of the room?  I don't know.  You can't approach it, so it just may 
not be anything.

"Why won't the Bots behave or help me?"
Check the dials on the side of the PET; if they're in the red, the Bots are 
probably not helping out too much.  Adjust them in the Scupture room.

"Where is Titania?"
Titania's room is located above the Top of the Well.  To get there, take the
stairs near the Top of the Well on the side nearest the Embarkation Lobby,
turn around, and enter the neatly hidden door.

"The chicken keeps flying past me!  How can I stop it?"
You'll need to break the dispensing system by removing the yellow fuse in
Titania's room.  See "The Parrot's Chicken" for more information.

"The Succ-U-Bus keeps eating my chicken!"
See "The Parrot's Chicken" for more information.

"Are there any general hints in the game?"
If the BellBot is in the right mood, just saying "Help" will give you a hint.  
The BellBot gives both general and room-specific hints, so ask in different 
areas when you're stuck.

"What's behind the wall opposite the Pellerator at the Top of the Well?"
Hmmm...  I don't know either.

"What's the little device to the left of the steering wheel on the bridge?"
That's another stumper.  It appears to be some kind of device for looking at
the ship's blueprints, but I have no idea how to activate it.

"I had my long stick earlier, and now it's gone!"
This appears to be a bug in the game, but I haven't seen it myself.  The long
stick disappears for some people, and they can't get another. Contact Simon 
& Schuster with your bug details, as I can't help you here.

IV. Walkthrough
###############

Some parts of the walkthrough can be used in a different order than the one
presented below.  Check the "Requirements" section for each piece to see which
parts have to be played before others.


Introduction
------------
Look at the computer, open the CD Tray, and put the Staship Titanic Disc in the 
tray. The ship will crash into your house, and the DoorBot will ask if you will 
help.  Answer whatever you like, take the photo of your house when prompted, and 
once you're in the elevator, press the top button.  Once in the Embarkation 
lobby, go to the plinth, and press the button for the opening credits.  Finally, 
go to the DeskBot, answer all her questions, and get your Super Galactic 
Traveler class room.

Gameplay
------------
When you first begin the game you are in your home. You can check out the tv, but to get on with the game you should check out the computer on the desk.

To start the plot, insert the cd into the computer. Protip: open the drive sled first.

The starship now crashes into your home. Or rather, the bow of the starship does. As Fentible, the doorbot explains, it's just some paint damage. He asks you to help out. And after he remembers to give you your PET, he will ask you to type yes. Type something and he will get you onto the starship after snagging a photo of the sky over your home.

Once in the elevator he will ask you to press the top button. On the ride up he will give a basic summary of what is going on: the ship is in shambles and the bots have had their cellpoint settings messed with. As you reach the destination, Fentible will tell you to press the button on the right after exiting the lift.

So, take a step to the right and press the button for the opening credits. With them over the lights will come on and you can proceed to the check in desk.

Ring the bell on the check in desk and you will see that the bell is Marsinta, the deskbot. She will ask you a sequence of questions about what room you'd like. And then proceed to tell you that you won't like your actual room. Krage, the Bellbot, will show up and conclude that he doesn't need to do anything and leave you to figure out how to get to your room on your own.

Mother
------
Requirements: SGT Class
Go to the Parrot Room, grab the parrot, then leave the room.  You'll be left 
with a feather.  Go to the service elevator (it's in the Embarkation lobby), and 
head to the Bilge room.  Here resides the Mother Succ-U-Bus, who's not feeling 
well.  Activate it, put the feather in the tray, and press "Send".  Surprise, 
it's Brobostigon!  Grab Titania's Olfactory Center and the Blue Fuse.

Disarming the Bomb
------------------
*Note: If you don't touch the bomb, it won't go off.  If you touch it, you'll
have to solve the puzzle.  Well, maybe you don't _have_ to, but it's annoying
if you don't.
Requirements: SGT Class
Just off Titania's room, there's a bomb with a friendly red button to press...
You pressed the button, didn't you?  Okay, well, there are literally millions of 
possible combinations, and having the bomb taunt you while you try them doesn't 
help much.  Or, maybe it does...  Prehaps you should listen to the taunts now 
and then.  Remember, "NOBODY LIKES A SMARTASS".  

Upgrading to 2nd Class
----------------------
Requirements: SGT Class
Go to the appropriate elevator and head to your floor (either read it from your 
Designer Room Numbers or just select My Stateroom on the Remote Thingummy in the 
elevator).  To find the room, just look up and click on the various doors until 
you find the correct one.  You will probably need to use the small elevator to 
get to your room.  Once in your room, use your PET to Deploy the personal 
maintenace hub, horizontal worksurface, the horizontally mobile storage 
compartment, and the fully recumbent relaxation device.  Inflate the bed, 
operate the visual entertainment device, get on the bed, and look at the TV.  
Turn it on, and turn to channel 3.  Exit the room and head back to the hallway.  
Go to the Succ-U-Bus, and press "Receive" to get your magazine.  Head back up to 
the Top of the Well and the Embarkation lobby, go to the DeskBot, activate her, 
and give her your magazine.

The Broken Elevator
-------------------
Requirements: 2nd Class
Head to the bottom of the Well, and collect the LiftBot head.  Find a TV (Either 
in your room or in the Parrot Room if you're still SGT class), and check channel 
5.  Note the floor displayed on the screen, and head to the elevators.  You'll 
find that one of them isn't working (probably #4).  Take the elevator next to 
the broken one to the floor you saw on the TV, and enter the broken elevator.  
Take the sphere (it's really Titania's Eye) and replace it with the LiftBot 
head.

E-Mail
------
*Note: This section is optional.  It explains the plot a little better.
Requirements: 2nd Class (Well, kind of)
Head to Titania's room, and enter the FuseBox room.  Open the fusebox, turn the 
red switch sideways, remove the red fuse, and leave.  Head to the Creator's 
room, note the locations of the three busts, and throw the lever at the front of 
the room.  Whoops!  But, now you can see the message behind each head ("THIS", 
"THAT", and "OTHER").  Now you can head back to the FuseBox room, look at the 
computer, and read everyone's e-mail.  The usernames are "Leovinus", 
"Scraliontis", and "Brobostigon", and the passwords match the word that was 
hidden behind their statue.  Of course, you can probably just enter all three 
passwords for each username until you get their e-mail.

The Parrot's Pistachios
-----------------------
Requirements: 2nd Class
You'll notice the parrot whining about pistachios occasionally, so it's time to 
get him some.  Well, you can't get the pistachios to the parrot, but you can 
take the parrot to the pistachios.  Head to the Parrot Room, grab the bugger, go 
to the Succ-U-Bus, turn it on, and put him in the Succ-U-Bus tray.  Drag the 
Designer Room Number for your 2nd Class Room onto the Succ-U-Bus (you'll hear a 
tone), and press "Send".  Head to the appropriate elevator, the appropriate 
floor, and into your 2nd Class room.  Go to the Succ-U-Bus, press "Receive", and 
take the cylinder.  The parrot will be freed, but at least he's in the room. Go 
click on the bowl of pistachios (next to the right-hand bed), and the parrot 
will eat them.  Click on the handle to release the bowl, and take the bowl, 
which just happens to be Titania's ear!

Upgrading to 1st Class
----------------------
Requirements: 2nd Class
Getting an upgrade to 1st Class is simple; just ask the DeskBot!  Of course, she 
may not be too cooperative, so head to the Sculpture room and examine the statue 
that looks remarkably like her.  Adjust the two sliders until the top two 
settings on the side of your PET are both high (yellow) instead of low (red).  
This will put her in a much better mood, so head back to the Embarkation Lobby 
and ask the DeskBot for an upgrade ("Can I have an upgrade?").

Chevron TV
----------
Requirements: 1st Class
Find the nearest TV, and tune to Channel 4.  This must be one of Titania's eyes, 
and it's staring at the ceiling in one of the First Class staterooms.  Re-create 
the designer room number you see there in your PET by holding the SHIFT key on 
your keyboard and clicking on the pieces of the room chevron (it's upside down).  
Save this chevron, and head to the indicated floor using the LiftBot.  (It 
appears to always be Floor 7, Elevator 2, Room 3, but your mileage may vary).  
Enter this room, and click on the four center lights.  You'll notice that one of 
them is loose, so give the BellBot a call.  Have him "Get the broken light", and 
you'll discover that it's another of Titania's eyes!

The Titanic Titillator
----------------------
Requirements: 1st Class, Blue Fuse (see "Mother")
Jump in the Pellerator, and head to the bar.  Look at the TV, and take note of 
the drink recipe.  You see, there's a piece of Titania on the bar shelf, but the 
BarBot can't do anything but make the drink on the TV.  Ring the bell, and take 
the glass the BarBot sets on the bar.  You can ask him about the different parts 
of the drink recipe, which should give you an idea of how to get them.
** Crushed Television **
Head to the Parrot Lobby, and summon the BellBot.  Ask him to "Throw the 
television down the well", and he'll gladly comply.  Take an Elevator to the 
bottom of the well, and get the crushed Television.  Don't take too long, or
it might be gone before you get there.
** Pureed Starlings **
Head down (up, whatever) to Titania's room, enter the FuseBox room.  Plug in the 
blue fuse,  turn the blue knob sideways, turn the yellow knob sideways, and 
remove the yellow fuse.  Head for the Pellerator, take it to the Promenade deck, 
and go to the fan.  Turn it on, set the speed to "Fast", and watch the carnage 
ensue (I can't believe I just said "ensue").  Head back to the top of the well, 
and take an Elevator to any SGT Class floor (28-38).  Go to the restaurant, 
click the switch for a chicken, and put the chicken under the leftmost 
dispenser.  While it's dispensing, hold the empty glass under the chicken to get 
a glass full of Pureed Starlings!
** Lemon **
Go to the Parrot Lobby, and grab the perch stuck in the bags.  Take the 
Pellerator to the Promenade deck, and go to the Hammer Dispenser.  Use the perch 
to press the button (you'll hear a tone, and it will take a three times), and 
grab the hammer.  Go back to the Top of the Well, and take an elevator to any 
SGT Class Floor.  Enter the small room at the end of the hall, look at the 
glass-encased stick, use the hammer to break the glass, and take the stick.  Go 
back to the top of the well, and take the Gondola to the Arboretum.  Open the 
arboretum, use the long stick to knock down a lemon from the tree (just swing it 
at the trees), and take it.
** Mixing the Drink **
Finally, head to the bar via the Pellerator, and ring the bell.  Give the BarBot 
the lemon, the TV, and the glass of starlings.  He'll ask "What's This", so 
answer "Pureed Starlings".  Ask him to "Get the vodka", and he'll make the 
drink.  Unfortunately, this kind of shorts him out, but he can still "Get the 
vision center" for you, and you can take it from the bar.  
If you tweak the BarBot's settings before mixing the drink, he won't short out,
but instead will use an emergency backup personality (with some interesting,
but non-critical results).

"Don't Touch That"
------------------
Requirements: 1st Class
The parrot obviously doesn't want you touching the broken light fixture next to 
the Succ-U-Bus in the parrot room, so there's no better reason to mess with it.  
Take the Gondola to the Arboretum, and head to the Pellerator-looking area 
opposite the real Pellerator and grab the hose.  Head back to the Parrot Lobby 
and over to the light.  Use the hose on the light, and you'll be left with the 
other end of the hose.  Turn towards the Succ-U-Bus, give it the other end of 
the hose, and he'll blow.  Turn back towards the light, and you'll see something 
rise out of the fixture.  Grab it; it's Titania's nose!

Making Music
------------
Requirements: 1st Class
If you've been to the First Class Restaurant, you've probably noticed the 
horrible music there.  Time to do something about it, so head to the Music Room.  
Take a look at the chairs, note the settings, and duplicate them on the control 
panel and press the red button to make some beautiful music.  Now, it seems 
that a lot of people are having trouble with this one, and they also haven't
figured out that the solution to this puzzle is on the back of the game box.
So, for those people, here are the settings:
  Upper Left:  You can't adjust these.  Don't bother; they're already correct!
  Upper Right: Vertical Slider - Second from the top
               Horizontal Slider - Third from the left
               Upper Knob - Top to the right
               Lower Knob - Top to the right
  Lower Left:  Vertical Slider - Fourth from the top (far bottom)
               Horizontal Slider - Furthest left
               Upper Knob - Top to the left
               Lower Knob - Top to the left
  Lower Right: Vertical Slider - Third from the top
               Horizontal Slider - Fourth from the left (far right)
               Upper Knob - Top to the left
               Lower Knob - Top to the right

So, here's what it will look like:
         |
         # /
         |  / 
         | 
          --#-

|        |
| \      | \
|   \    #   /
#        |
 #---     ---#

Finally, all four green lights must be lit.  If you have it right, the piece
will last about 1:40, and all four instruments will stop at the same time with
a final "ping".  Once it's right, turn around and head to the phonograph, and 
press "Record" (that's the Circle button).  Go back to the control panel and 
play the music all the way through.  Go back to the phonograph, stop it (Square
button), play it to make sure you've got it (triangle), and then stop and eject
the cylinder (square twice).  Take the cylinder, back up, and take the 
phonograph ear, which is really Titania's ear.
Take the Pellerator to the First Class Restaurant, head over to the Maitre'D 
Bot, rip out his remaining arm, and poke him in the center of his buttocks (no 
stick required) until he gives in.  It will take several tries, and if you're
hitting the right spot, he will start complaining ("You are hitting me in my
Achillies Buttock!" or something like that).  Once defeated, he will allow you 
to sit at Scraliontis' table, where you can find a napkin, the Green fuse, and 
the Maitre'D Bot's other arm, holding the key.  Go to the music system, and 
unlock it with the arm holding the key.  Eject the cylinder (square twice), 
set it aside, and replace it with the one you recorded and press "Play" 
(triangle).  Head back to the Maitre'D Bot, who will be relaxed enough to let 
go of Titania's Auditory Center if you got it right.  If you got it wrong, 
he'll let you know, and you'll need to head back to the Music room to re-record
it.

The Parrot's Chicken
--------------------
Requirements: 1st Class, napkin (see "Making Music")
The parrot wants a hot chicken, so let's give him one.  If you haven't already, 
go to Titania's FuseBox room and turn the yellow knob sideways and remove the 
yellow fuse.  Also, you'll need a Designer Room Number saved from the Parrot 
Lobby if you don't have one yet.  Take the elevator to any SGT class floor, and 
enter the restaurant.  Flip the switch for a chicken (if you already have a cold 
one, give it to the Succ-U-Bus first).  Use the chicken on your napkin to get a 
plain chicken.  Use the chicken on the middle dispenser to coat it with mustard, 
and send it to the Parrot Lobby using the Succ-U-Bus (drop in basket, drop 
Designer Room Number of Parrot Lobby on Succ-U-Bus, press send).  Next, take the 
elevator back to the Top of the Well, and head to the Parrot Lobby.  Now is a 
good time to save your game.  Go to the Succ-U-Bus, activate it, press 
"Receive", grab the cylinder, use the chicken on the napkin again, and head to 
the cage.  Lure the parrot all the way to the left side of the cage, and let him 
make a grab for the chicken.   As he's enjoying his dish, quickly grab the 
perch, which is really Titania's central intelligence core!  If you miss, just
restore your game and try again; it really _is_ possible to do it.

A Change in the Weather
-----------------------
Requirements: 1st Class, both Maitre'D Bot's arms, Green Fuse (see "Making 
Music")
According to the DeskBot, the RowBot's voice is kind of funny, so let's 
investigate.  Head down to Titania's Room, to the FuseBox room, open it, stick 
in the green fuse, and turn the knob.  Go back to the Top of the Well, and take 
the Gondola to the Arboretum.  Approach the now-working Arboretum, and change 
the season to Autumn.  Surprise, it looks like another Titania part!  Use the 
long stick to knock it free, and grab Titania's speech center.  Next, change 
the season to winter.  Turn around, and, surprise, the entire place is frozen 
over!  Head over to the area opposite the Pellerator, turn around, and approach 
the other RowBot.  
Click on his chest to reveal two switches; when you hold one down, the other 
goes up, and you need them both to be pulled down.  If only you had another 
hand...  Oh wait, you do!  Use the Maitre'D Bot's arms on both switches so 
they're both held down at the same time.  Now remember, BOTH arms must be 
empty, and the only way to get them that way is to see the previous section, 
"Making Music".  Once you've got the RowBot to stop singing by holding down
both levers, you can take his mouth, which is really Titania's mouth!  To leave
the area, you'll need to change the season from Winter to any other one.

Putting Titania Back Together
-----------------------------
Requirements: All 11 parts of Titania
Two eyes, two ears, nose, mouth, core, and four centers.  Put them all into 
Titania, with the four centers arragned thusly:
   yellow    red
   blue      green
Once Titania's working again, the room behind her will open up, allowing you 
to enter the Bridge.

Going Home
----------
Requirements: Working Titania
Enter the Bridge, and go to the hanging helmet.  Use the photo from home in the 
slot, and use your PET to activate the Navigation control.  If you haven't
figured it out, this is the point in the game to use your 3D glasses, although
you may do better without them.  Now to the controls... Better go pick up 
that degree in astronomy, eh?  No, it's not really that hard.  Titania's 
navigation controls can be used to triangulate a position based on the photo 
from your house.  You're going to pick three stars in a relatively small 
triangle, so go to the photo, pick a star (it will be highlighted with a cross), 
and return to the starview.  Now, look around the starview until you find the 
star you just highlighted (it will be marked with a yellow diamond).  Line up 
the cross and the diamond until the coordinate light starts blinking, and press 
the "L" button on your keyboard to lock the coordinate.  One of the green lights
at the botton of the screen will light up to verify the lock, and the starmap
will rotate to lock on. Now, switch back to the house and pick another star.  
Back to the star map, find the second star (you only have two degrees of 
freedom, so controls get weird here), and press "L" to lock the second 
coordinate once you've lined them up (a line will appear between the locked 
star and the red cross).  Now, to finish off the triangle, pick a third star 
in the photo, find and lock it using "L", and finally press "Set Destination".  
Exit from the helmet, and head to the wheel.  Press the "Go" button, and 
you're off to home!

For those of you who can't be bothered to look at your instruction booklet,
here's how to control the Navigation helmet:
TAB     Toggles between the starmap and the photo of your home
Z       Left (or use the mouse)
X       Right (or use the mouse)
'       Up (or use the mouse)
/       Down (or use the mouse)
;       Forward (or use the mouse)
.       Backward (or use the mouse)
SPACE   Stop moving
L       Lock a coordinate
D       Unlock a coordinate

V. Fun Things to Talk About
###########################

After hacking through the executable, I found the word lists for the game.
I haven't tried nearly all of these, but I bet asking about at least some 
of the following can give you some pretty interesting answers...  Enjoy!

(Note: the "*"'s are my own, for the tenderhearted, not to mention avoiding
unwanted search engine hits... Use your imagination for the actual words)

Interesting words and phrases in the word lists:
------------------------------------------------
42                                     98129812
a game of nib                          a john
air miles                              alcohol
aldebaran                              all wearing womens clothes
allenoid                               alligator
alqhamra                               amphibian fanciers club loyalty card
an acolyte                             anphosterous
answers on a postcard please as to what
are we all doomed                      are you mad
are you the messiah                    arthropodsmagazine
asgons tregeriasis                     bastard
bazonium                               bbibbet
been to a concert                      bellbotixcorporation
big bang burger bar                    bizarre name
blabbering on about                    blarghish lottery
blerontin girls weekend fellowship     blobby blobby blobby
borg                                   brain-pickler
bread pudding                          byzantine numismatist
can i have a paper in the morning      caprifornium
carb gorgefist                         cheer me up
cheesecake                             ciceley neckflap
coaches of nib                         corn fritter convention
crap                                   crap name
did little red riding hood wear a hood
did the tin man have a heart           dixie lee bone
do bears sh*t in the woods             do you ever dress up
dodgyelectronstainremover              does the pope wear a funny hat
douglas adams                          dumbass
e=mc^2                                 enersher real seat belts
ferme la bouche                        flashbacks
flatterday                             gigabucklottery
great britain                          guinea-pigs
have you taken leave of your senses    heard of the album
high tea company                       hiker
i am a smartass                        i am bored
i am fed up with this                  i am real bored
insurance                              is the earth round
is not the captain supposed to go down with the ship
is the end nigh                        is the pope a catholic
is there a therapist on board          is wrestling fixed
it is a quantum paradox through which history has been squeezed
jellyfishtrainer                       kazoo
limpetigo                              little boys room
little girls room                      mad bad and dangerous to know
make like a tree and leave             mayan arrivan onwhen
mclevity                               meaning of life
meringue and high tea company          milliway
mindreader                             mucal-salvage plant
mucor accelerator                      neville sinkmeister
nib                                    no claims bonus
nubianoracle                           nubiansausagefillers
other cats to whip                     other fish to fry
pelvicplating                          p*nis
perch care the low-cost way            pesky bird
philosobot                             pizzabot
planet earth                           pluvian wart-hog
pocket-sized elephant tetherer         pogon
pretend you just summoned yourself     printf("hello world\n");
puppies                                restaurant at the end of the universe
sh*t name                              Shorbert
shrinkbot                              similar in size to the left earlobe
starlight under fives sculpture competition
strange-force technology               tarbert
tell bob                               terminator
terra firma                            tharpoid
that b*tch                             the boring bot
the cheeky bot                         the end is nigh
the gat                                the john
the states                             the sub
theoretical                            therapist
this game is crap                      this game is tedious
tlaserver                              toad baitingbaiting
toastrack                              tra la la
transtentorial herniation              uncleharry
undercover operation                   united kingdom
ursorian piccocat                      v*gina
ve haf vays of making you talk         vivian iridium
we are all doomed                      what in the name of god
what is pi to 100 decimal places    
what is the maximum air velocity of an unladen swallow
willan oneat                           willan ontake
williams                               willing watchen
worlds lobster wrestling finals        you are the messiah
zomboid

Comments
The Music Room also has the panel instructions on one of the chairs.

When navigating the starfield, you can already hit L as soon as a connecting line between the crosshair and the diamond appears; the computer will complete the lining up for you. This saves you a lot of fiddling and frustration.

I found that if you press CTRL+C, a new screen appear named "Cheat Room"

Great WT, better than I used which mentioned the 2 collaborators as "a doll" that came out of the Succubus and the other "asleep" in the restaurant. Far more logical that they were murdered by the guy that ends up fishing. I also LOVE the comment about the cheat with ctrl + c which gives you almost every location, object, setting. Must have been for testing, never knew that and I played the game back in the day also.
</walkthru>

<adventureguide>**Mystery Manor Adventure Walkthrough**
Prologue:

You start the game in your living room. You can't do much here but you hear soothing classical music. You can just see your TV in the lower left corner of your screen. Click with your magnifying cursor on the TV to stand in front of your TV. Turn on the TV through the buttons at the bottom right. A rather crabby Douglas Adams appears in your TV and he urges you to "get on with it".

Zoom out of the TV through the zoom out arrow to the left of the TV. Then turn to the left through the curved arrow. You see your computer. Click forward to zoom in on your computer. The CD-ROM is in the base of the computer screen. There are 3 CD-ROM discs next to the computer. 2 of the CD-ROM discs are empty, but the third one, where you see the black lines, is the TITANIC CD. Open the CD-ROM drawer.

Pick up the Titanic CD-ROM with your Hand and drag this CD-ROM to the opened CD-ROM drawer and then release the CD and .... Now the actual intro follows.

A spaceship will drill itself into your home. A robot emerges from the spaceship and presents itself as Fentible de DoorBot.

Fentible needs your help and he asks if you want to go with him. You will get the "Personal Electronic Thingy" from Fentible, in short the PET. 

The PET is now at the bottom of your screen.

After Fentible has given you the PET, answer his question by typing Yes or No in the PET, and then press ENTER. It doesn't matter what you type in, because Fentible regards every answer as Yes. Fentible then sees a photo on your cupboard and tells you to take the photo with you. So grab the Photo with your Hand Cursor and drag the Photo to the bottom left of your PET and then release. The Photo is then stored in the Inventory section of the PET. If you do not grab the photo quickly enough, Fentible will eventually do so and put it in your PET for you. This photo is crucial to be able to finish the game and without this photo in your PET the game will not continue.

With Fentible you automatically enter the elevator of the spacecraft Titanic where Fentible tries to press the elevator buttons. 

Fentible is unable to push a button because his orientation system seems to be a bit confused, or he has been drinking too much robot oil, and again he is asking you for help.

So press the top button and the Elevator will go up. During the elevator trip, listen carefully to what Fentible says  because he gives you some important instructions.

Fentible says that there are only robots aboard the Titanic and that the ship's Central Intelligence has been sabotaged. As a result, the robots, including Fentible, no longer function properly. All those robots are really crazy now. Fentible also tells you to press some button and to visit Marsinta, the DeskBot. Marsinta will assign you a room on the ship and Fentible hopes that it will be a Super Galactic Traveler Class room. You will then be brought to your room by Krage, the BellBot. At least ... if Krage is still functioning properly. You are then expected to repair the problems aboard the Titanic. 

You can always read all conversations again in the Dialogue section of your PET. The elevator stops and the doors open and you are in the Embarcation Lobby. Welcome aboard the Starship Titanic. You will not encounter any real living creatures, just crazy robots. First, let me explain a few things about this game:

The PET:

From now on our PET is dangling at the bottom of your screen. First take a closer look at the PET to become familiar with it. The PET has 5 section. You open each section of the PET by clicking on the icons that you see on the right edge of the PET. Name those icons, from top to bottom, A, B, C, D, E

With Icon A you open the Chat O Mat screen of the PET. Through this Chat O Mat you can talk to the robots and you can also read back every conversation. To answer questions from the robots, type in an answer through your keyboard and confirm with the Enter key. Once you have spoken with a robot, the photo of that robot appears on the right of this screen. If you want to talk to a certain robot, click on his photo and the robot will come to you. The photo on the left side of this screen then shows you the robot that you have called. The pointers on the left indicate how willing a robot is. If a pointer is red, the robot is not willing at all. If a pointer is yellow, the robot is willing to help you.

With Icon B you open the Personal Luggage screen of the PET. This is where your things are stored and is in fact your Inventory. To save an item in this screen, grab the item with your hand and drag it to your PET and then release the item. This screen does not have to be open for this. At this moment you will find the photo from your house here. You can also remove the items from your inventory to, for example, send the item through the Succ-U-Bus to another room

With Icon C you open the Remote Thingummy screen where you can operate the various objects and / or devices, such as Elevators, the TV or the Succ-U-Bus. If there is a device that can be operated in a room of the Titanic, the image of that device is stored in this screen and you can operate it from this screen.

With Icon D you open the Designers Room Numbers (Chevron) screen. Every space / room on board the Titanic has a unique symbol, these are the so-called Chevrons. As soon as you enter a room for the first time, the Chevron for that room appears in the right-hand box of this screen. It is important that you always SAVES these Chevrons yourself. You save a Chevron by dragging it from the right box to one of the other boxes. You can also edit a Chevron yourself, to change it. To edit a Chevron, hold down the SHIFT key while clicking on the lines in the Chevron with your mouse cursor. Never forget to SAVE the Chevrons the first time you get a Chevron. If you do not save the Chevron, you will lose the Chevron again

With Icon E you open the screen in which you can  Load and Save, set Options and quit the game. However, there are only 5 Save Slots available. So if those 5 Save Slots are used then you have to overwrite previous saves. So if you want to save your Save Games then you will always have to first remove the 5 Saves from the game to save them in a different location. You can give a name to a Save Games yourself

Now something about the game in general:

The Starship Titanic is a large spaceship with many sections and rooms. Not all sections and rooms are immediately accessible. Marsinta, the DeskBot, will initially give you the status of "Super Galactic Traveler". However, this is pretty much the lowest status you can have as a passenger aboard the Titanic. As a result, certain areas of the Titanic will initially not be accessible to you. So you will have to convince Marsinta to upgrade your status a few times. However, that doesn't just happen. To upgrade your status you will have to prove to Marsinta that you are worthy of getting a higher status. The Robots on board the Titanic are very crazy and often not very helpful. However, you can change the "settings" of the Robots so that they become more willing. I will explain this further in the Walkthrough the moment you need to do this.

We'll continue with the game. So we ended up with the elevator in:

Chapter 1: Explore the Titanic
Embarcation Lobby:

You have stepped out of the elevator and you are standing in front of the elevator in a circular room. You are in the Embarcation Lobby. Turn right.  Behind the counter you can see the Chevron of this room on the wall. First open the Chevron screen of your PET through symbol D. Now drag this Chevron to one of the boxes to save the Chevron. Always do this with every new Chevron that you get.

You see a pillar next to the elevator. Go forward 1 click and then turn right. You stand in front of the pillar.

"Welcome to the Starship Titanic. Please press the button for opening credits" you read on the pillar. So press the button, below the text and ..... you will now see the Opening video of the game. After the video you are back in the Embarcation Room. Right in front of you are 2 brown doors and a large Golden door between those 2 brown doors. Turn left. You look at the counter.

Go forward to the counter and then press the call button on the counter and .... you will now meet Marsinta Drewbish, the DeskBot.

Marsinta is just as crazy as Fentible. Actually.....all robots on the Titanic are completely mix-up, so don't rely on their cooperation too much. Marsinta will ask you a number of questions to which you must type the answer in the PET. For some questions you have to answer "yes". You answer other questions by choosing one of the options that Marsinta gives you. Confirm each answer by pressing your ENTER key. It really doesn't matter what you answer.

So you work your way through Marsinta's questions and eventually she assigns you a room. Marsinta assigns you a Super Galactic Traveler Class room and she tells you which floor that room is on and with which elevator you can get there. She also says the room number of your room. The number of your room varies per game. You can read all this in the Chat O Mat section of your PET. I was assigned room 11 on floor 38, accessible through elevator 3. You have also received the Chevron from your room and this Chevron is now stored in the Chevron section of your PET.

Krage, the BellBot, turns up but he is not going to take you to your room. Krage doesn't feel well and he takes the rest of the day off.

Marsinta has given you the status of Super Galactic Traveler Class. Unfortunately this is the lowest status on board the Titanic. This means that certain areas of the spaceship are not yet accessible to you. You will first have to upgrade your status if you also want to be able to enter the rooms that you cannot yet access. 

You are now standing with your back to the counter and in front of you see a door. Make sure the Chevron Section of your PET is in your screen, because then you can read in which part of the ship you will end up. Before we go find the assigned room, we first have a look around to get a little familiar with the way you move through this game. And to explore some areas in advance.

The Top of the Well Hall:

Go forward and then turn right and go forward through the door. You arrive in the hall that is called "The Top of the Well". The Chevron of the hall appears in your PET. Drag the Chevron from the right box to one of the other boxes to save the Chevron. 

You are at the front side of the "Top Of The Well". Behind you is the stairs and the door to the Embarcation Lobby. Straight ahead you see the stairs and the door to the Parrot Room. You hear a message through the internal communication system. Move forward 1 click. You are then in the middle of the hall. Turn left. You look at two thick pillars. The Well is located between those pillars but we are not going there yet. Turn 2 times to the right or left. You are now looking into an enormous long hall. Unfortunately you are not allowed to enter this hall yet. This is one of the rooms of the Titanic that you can only enter if you have been upgraded to 2nd or 1st Class.

NB: It is possible that Fentible or Krage will now show up again. If this happens you type in the Chat O Mat screen "Go away" to make Fentible disappear again.

Turn left or right twice more. You then look at the large pillars again. You can move forward between the pillars, but you can also move to the left or right of the pillars to continue to the Back side of this large Top Of The Well Hall. Both on the right and on the left there are 2 Elevators in the pillars that you can use to go to the floors where your assigned room is located. However, you will have to find out for yourself which Elevator to take. In the wall, on the left, is also the Pellerator. The Pellerator is a kind of subway with which you can go to the other areas of the Titanic. However, the Pellerator is not accessible to someone of your low status. You will first have to upgrade to 2nd Class

Go forward 1 click and then turn right through the right arrow. Then go 1 click forward again and you are on the right side of the "Top Of The Well".

Go forward another click. You will see a blue marker on the thick pillar to your left. This is a Elevator Pillar. Turn left towards the pillar. This is the Right hand Elevator on the Right side of the "Top of the Well. Turn 2 times counterclockwise. You will now see the Left hand Elevator Pillar. The left hand Elevator is Elevator 3 and the right hand Elevator is Elevator 4. 

Turn right again 2 times and go forward to the Right hand Elevator 4. You are then standing in front of the right-hand Elevator 4

Open your pet's Thingummy screen. This screen now shows the photo of the Elevator and on the right you see the "Call" button. By clicking on the Elevator photo and then on the "Call" button you call the Elevator, which then opens. Give it a try .... so click on the Elevator photo and then on the "Call" button and .... However, you will now be notified that this Elevator is "Out of Order".

Remember that this elevator 4, on the right hand side of this hall, is out of order. The left hand Elevator 3 works, but you'll notice that later. Zoom out through the zoom-out arrow on the right next to the elevator. Turn right through the right arrow and then move forward 2 clicks. You are then at the rear side of the "Top of the Well" hall. Turn right and go forward 1 time.

The Back of the Well Hall:

You are now looking into a long hall again, but you are again not allowed in. Left and right is a staircase that leads to doors that you are also not allowed to pass through now. Turn around. You look at the back of "The Top of the Well".

Go forward 1 time and then turn right, through the right arrow, and go forward 1 click again.

You are now on the left side of the "Top of the Well" hall. In the distance you can see the brown round entrance door of the Pellerator. The two thick pillars, in front of the Pellerator, contain the 2 Elevators on this left side of the "Top of the Well". Move forward one more time. On the right is the Pellerator and on the left the right Elevator. Turn left to the right Elevator. Then turn left twice to the left Elevator. The left Elevator is Elevator 1 and the right Elevator is Elevator 2 .......

 Also with these two Elevators you can go to the Floors where your assigned room is located. However, you will have to try out for yourself which elevator you need to go to reach your room. Turn back 3 times to the right and then go forward 2 clicks again and then turn left again. You are back at the front side of the "Top o f the Well" hall and now look ahead between the two front thick pillars. Between the 2 front pillars is the entrance to the Dome. Through the Dome you reach Titania's Room and the Bridge.

Dome Room:

Now go 1 click straight ahead, between the pillars. You are then between the 2 front pillars and you are standing in front of a staircase. You can walk up the stairs and then look down at the top of the stairs into the deep shaft, but it's no use to you. So turn around right away. You are standing in front of a brown / white door. This door is the entrance to the Dome.

Click forward through the door and through an escalator and a normal staircase you will automatically continue down. When you have stopped you will get the Dome Chevron. Save the Chevron and then click with your down arrow and ........ through a round green Elevator platform you now go further down and end up on the floor of:

The Titania Room:

You get the Titania Room Chevron. Save the Chevron. Turn clockwise. Titania is in the middle of this large circular space.

Move forward 1 click. The Bridge is then on your left, but you don't have access to it yet. Turn right. 

You are now standing in front of Titania's head. Look down to zoom in on Titania's head.

Titania is not quite right. Titania lacks some essential parts. So here you come to the intention of this game. You have to assemble the different parts of Titania together and finally put Titania back together in order to gain access to the Bridge. The Bridge is the room behind you, which you are not allowed in yet. The Bridge is the only way back to your own home.

Titania is missing the following components:

Titania's Olfactory Center
Titania's Eye (so 2 eyes that you have to find separately)
Titania's Ear (so 2 ears that you have to find separately)
Titania's Piece
Titania's Piece
Titania's Auditory Center
Titania's Central Intelligence Core
Titania's Speech Center
Titania's Mouth

You will have to find all of these items to place them here in Titania. 

Zoom out of Titani's head through the zoom out arrow. There are 3 side rooms in this circular space. The middle side room, at Titania's head, is the Bridge Room, but you cannot go into it yet. If you are standing in front of Titania's head, turn to the left. Then go 1 click forward and then turn left 2 times. You are now in front of the left side room and this is Computer room.

Computer Room 

Go forward through the glass door and then immediately turn right. You stand in front of the computer. Look down through the down arrow that you get on the right side of the computer.

You cannot activate the computer because you need a login name and a password. And you don't know that yet. So zoom out and turn left. In the rear bookcase you see a metal door. Go to the metal door. "Danger Unbelievable High Voltage" is written on the door as a warning. Well ... you don't care, so click ahead to open the door. You end up in front of another metal door where you read "You really shouldn't have opened the first inspection plate. This is not only fantastically dangerous but you are voiding your warranty". Click forward again to also open through this door. You end up in front of the 3rd metal door and on this you read "Don't Say You Weren't Warned !!". 

Click forward again to also open the third door and it appears to be a Switchbox that you have now opened. You see colored buttons and circuits.

However, you have no idea what this is all for, so stay away from anything. But at least you now know where to find this switch box, should it be necessary to find it. Zoom out 4 times and you will be back in the computer room. Turn around and go outside through the glass door. Go forward 2 clicks and then turn left 2 times. You are now in front of the right-hand side room.

Enter through the glass door. This is the Succ-O-Bus room of Titania and you are facing the Succ-O-Bus. 

Turn left. You look at a Metal Door with a Red Button.

You will hear the Succ-O-Bus that tells you to stay away from this door, and from the Red Button. Go forward and you are zoomed in on the Red Button. "Push Button To Disarm Bomb" is written under the red button. Yes .... this is a BOMB and if you now click on the Red Button then you activate the Bomb instead of deactivating the bomb.

The Bomb Puzzle is OPTIONAL. You don't have to do this to bring the game to a successful ending. If you do not want to do the Bomb Puzzle then do NOT click on the Red Button. If you want to play the game further with the Bomb Puzzle, then press the red button but let me explain it first

The Bomb Puzzle:

If you want to play the Bomb Puzzle, you must first activate the bomb by clicking the Red Button. A Timer will start running, counting from 1000 to 0. If you don't know how to deactivate the bomb before the countdown is complete, the Titanic explodes. As soon as you have clicked on the Red Button, a Keyboard appears and the countdown starts. You then have to type in the Code sentence through the keyboard to defuse the bomb. But the Code sentence, with which you must deactivate the Bomb, will only be available at the end of the game, from Titania. 

So, while you just continue with the game, you have to watch the countdown for yourself. If you think that the Timer has almost reached 0 then you will have to return to the BOMB to click the Red Button again so that you reset the Timer to 1000 and the countdown starts again. So you will always have to do this until you hear the Code Sentence from Titania,  with which you can deactivate the Bomb again. So if you don't want to this then you better not click on the Red Button.

You are still standing in front of the bomb. Whether or not you have activated the Bomb, it does not matter. Turn around and go back out of this side room through the glass door. Then turn left and click forward to the green round platform and.......

.....  you go up with the platform and then stand in front of the stairs in the Dome. Click forward and naturally you walk up the stairs again and you go through the Dome and then you stand outside again on the white stairs. Turn around to the Dome door and then turn left and go 1 click forward and you are back in the front of the "Top of the Well" hall and look at the long hall where you are not yet allowed to enter. Go forward 1 click and then turn left. You look at the stairs and the door of the Parrot Room. 

Go forward and through the door and you are in the:

Parrot Room:

You get the Chevron from this room. Save the Chevron. Straight ahead you see a bird cage. There is a TV in front of the bird cage. If you now turn to the left, you will see a pile of white bags at the left wall. There is a stick in the pile of white bags.

Go forward to the pile of white bags and then grab the Stick. Drag the Stick to your Inventory. It is a Bird Perch.

Turn 2 times to the right and then go forward to the bird cage. You can now also see the round Succ-O-Bus box against the right wall. Turn left and you are in front of the opened bird cage. There is a blue parrot in the cage and it is not a friendly parrot

The bird  keeps screaming "Pieces of Eleven". Grab the parrot and put the beast in your inventory.

The cage will close automatically and the bird screams out his misery and it will not remain in your inventory either. After a few seconds, the parrot will automatically fly out of your inventory, but a Parrot feather will remain in your inventory

From now on you will hear the parrot scream every now and then. The parrot will automatically return to its cage. Turn left. At the bottom left of your screen you will see the TV in front of the birdcage. You can zoom in on it but you can't do anything with the TV yet. Turn left again so that you look at the door again. Go forward and back through the door to the "Top of the Well" hall. Back in this hall you go forward and through the door on the other side. You are then back in the

Embarcation Lobby.

Go forward to the other side. Then turn right, 1 click forward, turn left.

You are now in front of the elevator door of the elevator that you went up with Fentible before.

 Enter the elevator through the door. In the elevator you now press the middle elevator button and..........

You go down and the announcer tells you that the elevator is now going to the Bilge Room.

 When the elevator has stopped, turn left or right to the elevator door. Exit the elevator through the door. You have arrived in the:

Bilge Room:

Save the Chevron from the Bilge Room. Directly in front of you is the Succ-O-Bus. This is the highly advanced mail delivery system of this crazy spaceship. You will find a round Succ-O-Bus booth in every room of the spaceship. But here in this Bilge Room is the Head of this shipping system, Mother Succ-O-Bus. Go forward to the Mother Succ-O-Bus and click on it with your arrow cursor. Mother Succ-O-Bus is not feeling well. Succ-O-Bus has a cold.

Open your Inventory and drag the Parrot Feather to the tray of the Succ-O-Bus and then release the mouse to put the feather in the tray. Click on the Sent button and ..... Succ-O-Bus must sneeze violently from the feather and this causes its cold to pass. However, Succ-O-Bus spits the feather out and the feather lands back in your inventory. A Doll appears in the tray of Succ-OBus.

Click on the doll with your magnifying glass cursor and you take Titania's Olfactory Center from the doll.

Click again with your magnifying glass cursor on the doll and you take a Blue Fuse from the doll.

If you now also take a look at the Remote Thingummy screen of the PET, you will see that you now also have access to the Succ-O-Bus. Turn around and go back into the elevator and press the top button again to go back to the Embarcation Lobby Get out of the elevator and go 3 clicks forward and through the door you will be back in the "Top of the Well" hall Front. Go forward again 1 click and then turn left. You look again at the two thick pillars with the Dome in between.

Chapter 2: Find Your SGT Class Room:
Note: if you have activated the Bomb, do not forget to monitor the countdown so that you return to the Bomb Chamber in time to reset the Timer from 1000 onwards.

It is now high time to look up your room that you have been assigned to by Marsinta. Marsinta has assigned you a Super Galactic Traveler Class room. Marsinta has told you the room number and the number of the floor and also has told you with which elevator can reach your room. Both on the left and on the right side of the "Top of the Well" there are two Elevators, in the 2 thick pillars. Elevators 3 and 4 are located on the right side of the Top Of The Well. Elevators 1 and 2 are located on the left side of the Top of The Well. With Elevator 2 you can only go to Floors 1 and 27. Elevator 4 does not work.

Look in the Chat O Mat section of your PET which room you have been assigned to by Marsinta and for the Floor number and which elevator you need to get there.

Then go to that elevator, on one of the sides of the Top Of The well. 

Stand directly in front of the Elevator and call the Elevator through your Pet's Remote Thingummy screen.

Enter the elevator and the ElevatorBot asks you which floor you want to go to. So enter the floor number that Marsinta has told you.

If the Elevator where you are standing in is the right Elevator, the ElevatorBot will take you to the floor where your room is. If it is not the right Elevator, the ElevatorBot will refer you to one of the other Elevators. When the elevator has dropped you to your Floor, turn left and exit the elevator through the elevator door.

It is getting a bit complicated now. The floors where the Travelers Class rooms are look the all the same. It is a corridor with the rooms on one side. Between the rooms, so opposite the elevator, there is always a large Golden Door. That is the door of the "Restaurant". To the right of the restaurant door is a board with the menu that you can read by zooming in. If you open the big Golden door, it turns out to be a kind of cupboard with a Sauce Dispenser. Whether you will ever use it .... I doubt it.

The round Succ-O-Bus booth is at one end of the corridor. At the other end of the corridor is another large Golden Door. If you go through this door you will enter the Lounge. You can take a look inside. There are 16 rooms on each Floor, because every floor has 3 levels with rooms on each level. To the left of the sauce dispenser door are 9 rooms and to the right of the sauce dispenser door are 9 rooms. The rooms are therefore on 3 levels above each other. Depending on the room number that you have received from Marsinta, your room is therefore on the "ground floor", on the "1st floor" or on the "2nd floor". Between the rooms there is always a small elevator with which you can go to the "1st floor" and the "2nd floor" if your room is on these "floors". These are the Elevators of which Marsinta has given you the Elevator number.

There are no numbers on the doors of the rooms. To determine what the door of your room is you must click on the doors. In your PET you can read the number of the room. To see the upper rooms, stand against the other wall and look up through the up arrow. You will then see the top row of room doors.

Click on the doors to read the room numbers in your PET. Find out which door has the number of your room in this way. If your room is on the "ground floor" then click forward through the door to enter your room immediately. If your room is on the upper floors, you go up with one of the Elevators. In the elevator, press the button on the floor where your room is.

Once in your room you will receive a message from Marsinta that you have entered the correct room and that you may have won an Upgrade. You must turn on Channel 3 to hear how you can get the Upgrade. But your room appears to be completely empty and bare.

You have to furnish your room. In the Remote Thingummy screen of your PET all kinds of furniture and other items, with which you can now decorate your room, now appear. Use the arrows to scroll through the items. Click on an item and then the button on the right to place the item in your room. Choose the following furniture to furnish your room with it: Personal Maintenance Hub, Horizontal Work surface, Horizontal Mobile Storage Compartment, Fully Recumbent Relaxation Device, Inflate Fully Recumbent Relaxation Device Visual Entertainment Device (TV). You have to do this in a good order because otherwise your furniture will block each other.

Once you have furnished the room, climb up the bed through the forward arrow. You then look at  the TV. Click on the TV with your magnifying cursor. Turn on the TV with the button on the right of the Remote Thingummy screen. The TV will show you Channel 1. However, you have heard that you should watch Channel 3, so click on the up arrow next to the button until you see Channel 3 in the TV.

 On Channel 3 you read and you will hear that you have won an Upgrade. To get your Upgrade, you need the local magazine because you have to give it to Marsinta. Zoom out of the TV, turn left and leave your room through the door. If your room is on the "1st or 2nd floor" then you end up in the elevator. Click on the lower Elevator button to go down. When the elevator has stopped again, turn left and step outside through the elevator door. Go forward to the wall, and then go to the end of the corridor where the Succ-U-Bus is.

Click on the glass door of the Succ-U-Bus to open the Succ-U-Bus. Your Pet's Remote Thingummy screen will open. In this screen, click on the photo of the Succ-U-Bus and then click on the Retrieve button. The Succ-U-Bus spits out a cylinder. Grab the Cylinder and you take a Magazine out of it. Place the Magazine in your Inventory by dragging it into the PET.

Turn around and go to the center of the corridor, turn right. You are standing in front of the elevator with which you can return to the "Top of the Well".

Call the elevator, through the Remote Thingummy screen, and when you are back in the elevator, type in "Top of the Well" and the elevator will take you back up.

Get out of the elevator and go to the Embarcation Lobby:

Note: if you have activated the Bomb, do not forget to monitor the countdown so that you return to the Bomb Chamber in time to reset the Timer from 1000 onwards.

Chapter 3: Pistachio Nuts for the Parrot

Embarcation Lobby:

Go to the counter and click on Marsintha's bell and Marsinta reappears. 

Open your Personal Luggage screen in the PET and grab the Magazine and hand it out to Marsinta and .....

Your status is now being upgraded to 2nd Class. Marsinta assigns you a new, 2nd Class room.

Note down the new room number, the floor number and the elevator number. You have also received the Chevron from your new room.

Bottom of the Well:

So you are now a 2nd Class passenger. Go to the right - hand side of the "Top of the Well" and stand in front of Elevator 3. Call Elevator 3 and tell the ElevatorBot that you want to go to the "Bottom of the Well". The Elevator now sinks all the way to the bottom of the shaft. Exit the elevator and follow the corridor and you will be at the Bottom Of The Well. All 4 Elevators that go down from the "Top Of The Well" end up below here. There is a ball on the floor.

On the other side you see the corridors that lead to Elevators 1 and 2. Go forward 1 click and turn 2 times to the left. You then naturally look down at the ball that is lying on the floor. It appears to be the Head of a ElevatorBot. Grab it and put it in your inventory.

Click the forward arrow to look up again. Turn 2 times to the right and then go back to the corridor that leads to elevator 3. Stand at the back of the corridor in front of the elevator door. Call the elevator through the Remote Thingummy screen and take the elevator back up to the "Top of the Well".

Parrot Room:

Exit the elevator and go to the Parrot Room. Go to the bird cage. The parrot is back in the bird cage and now shouts "Piece of ten". Turn to the left to be in front of the TV. Zoom in on the TV through your magnifying cursor. Now the Remote Thingummy screen of your PET will open and the TV is now selected. Switch on the TV with the button of your Remote Thingummy screen and then set the TV to Channel 5, through the arrow buttons. You will then see a number on the TV screen.

It is the number of a Floor where you must go to. This floor number also varies per game, so make a note of it. With me it was number 27. 

Zoom out of the TV and leave the Parrot room again. Go to Elevators 3 and 4, on the right-hand side of the "Top Of The Well". As you already know, Elevator 4 is broken. So go into Elevator 3 and tell the Elevatorbot the floor number that you have just seen on the TV. Elevator 3 takes you to this floor. Get out of the elevator.

You are now on a Floor with 2nd Class rooms ..... Turn left and ... you see Elevator 4. So all 2nd Class floors have 2 Elevators. Stand in front of Elevator 4. Call the elevator through your Remote Thingummy screen. In Elevator 4 you automatically turn to the ElevatorBot and you see that this ElevatorBot has a completely smooth and white ball as his head.

Grab the Head / Ball of the ElevatorBot and put it in your inventory. It turns out to be one of Titania's Eyes. Now take the ElevatorBot's Head that you found on the Bottom of the Well from your inventory and place this head on the ElevatorBot of Elevator 4 and Elevator 4 will work again.

Now go find your new Class 2 room that you have been allocated through Marsinta's Magazine Upgrade. This is exactly the same as when you had to search for your Travelers Class room. My new room is room 3, Floor 22, accessible with Elevator 2.

Find your 2nd Class Room:

Read in your PET which upgrade you have received from Marsinta. You then read to which floor you need to go, your new room number and which elevator you need to take. Very likely that is not Floor 27, so you will first have to go back to the "Top of the Well" and you can now do this with Elevator 4, because you have just repaired it. 

Back on the "Top of the Well" you take elevator 1, 2, 3 or 4 to the Floor where you will find your new room. For me this is Floor 22, Room 3 and I reach that with Elevator 2. When you reach the right floor you still have to find the right room, and that is room 3 for me. Floors where the 2nd Class rooms are have 2 Elevators, a Succ-U-Bus booth and 4 downstairs rooms and 4 upstairs rooms that can be reached again through the 3 Elevators next to the doors.

So find your new room and enter it. A 2nd Class room is already fully and fairly luxuriously furnished. Take a look around in your new room. I still had to use one of the small Elevators on Floor 22 to reach my room. In every 2nd Class room there are 2 beds, a chair, a round table, a cupboard containing the Succ-U-Bus. There is a TV above the beds. Save the Chevron of your room because you need this Chevron in a minute.

In your 2nd Class room you will find various bowls with sweets. In one of those candy bowls there is no candy but Pistachio Nuts. This dish is on the bedside table next to the right bed. You have probably heard the Parrot in the Parrot Room always screaming for Pistachio nuts. In the Pistachio nut dish is a part of Titania but you cannot remove the nuts from the dish ....... you need the parrot for that. However, you cannot bring the bowl of nuts to the parrot, so you must now bring the parrot to your 2nd Class room. If you have looked around your new room, you go outside again and back to the Top of the Well with one of the two Elevators.

Pistasche Nuts for the Parrot:

Enter the Parrot room again and go to the bird cage. Grab the parrot again from its cage and put the beast back in your inventory.

Turn right quickly and run quickly to the Succ-U-Bus and open the glass door of the Succ-O-Bus

Take the parrot from inventory and spray the bird in the container of the Succ-U-Bus. Then open the Designers Room Numbers screen of your Pet and then look up the Chevron of your new 2nd Class room in your Saved Chevrons. Drag this Chevron into the Succ-U-Bus. You hear a sound

Open the Remote Thingummy screen again and then click on the Sent Button and the Succ-O-bus sends the parrot to your 2nd Class room. 

The Succ-O-Buss tells you that the package has been sent

Go back to the Elevators of the "Top Of The Well" and back to your new 2nd Class Room through the for your right Elevator and enter it again. 

In your 2nd Class room you open the Succ-U-Bus and ....

If you have clicked the right Chevron, of your new room, into the Succ-O-Bus in the parrot room, then this Succ now reports that he has a package for you ... So click on the Retrieve button and the Succ-U-Bus spits out another cylinder.

Click on the cylinder and the parrot will come out. The parrot will now flutter through your room.

Quickly go to the bowl with Pistachio Nuts. Click on the bowl and .... the parrot eats the whole dish empty and flies away.

In the now empty bowl you will see a screw knob. Click on the screw knob to loosen it and then click on the bowl a few times to pull the bowl off. Then grab the bowl and put it in your Inventory and it turns out to be one of Titania's ears. So now you have a Titania's Ear.

Leave the room and go back to the "Top Of The Well" with one of the two Elevators. Exit the elevator. We are now going to try to unravel the riddle of the Titanic. To do this, we need access to the computer in the side room of Titanias room, where there is also the Switch Cabinet. Go to the front of the "Top of The Well" and down through the door between the two front pillars to:

 Titania's Room:

Note: if you had activated the Bomb, do not forget to click on the red button again to restart the countdown from 1000.

Back in Titania's room you enter the side room where the computer and the control cabinet are. Go through the 3 doors of the switch cabinet again to see the colored buttons and the colored fuses. Now click on the Red Button to turn the arrow of the red button to the right. Then grab the Red Fuse and place the thing in your inventory.

So now you also have the Red Fuse. You already had a Blue Fuse, because you got it from the Doll. Leave the side room. You could now put the parts of Titania that you have collected in Titania, but I'd rather wait with this until I have collected all of Titania's parts. 

Return up through the green Elevator platform and then back up the stairs to the "Top Of The Well". Now go to the "Backside of the Top Of The Well" hall. Also at the back Top Of The Well is a large hall where you are not allowed in now, but the two side room, above the stairs, you can now enter. One room is the Creators Room and the other room is the Sculpture room. The Creators room is on the right and the Sculpture Room is on the left. Go to the:

Creators Room:

This Creators Room is actually a circular corridor. 

There are niches in this corridor and there is a Head in 3 of these niches. There is also a Red Lever on the wall.

Go to each of the 3 Heads in the niches. Stand straight in front of the heads. You see the back of the heads. Click on the Head and the Head then turns around and you read the head's name. Note down the name. Do this with each of the three heads.

The names are: Leovinus, Scraliontis and Brobostigon. Have you looked at the 3 heads all 3 then look for the red lever. Click on the red lever and ........ 

the 3 heads fall out of their niche and crash to the floor. Go back to each of the 3 niches. 

In every niche, where there was first a Head, you now read a word. The 3 words you read are: This, That, Other.

When you were at the computer in the side room of Titania's Room, I told you that a password and login name is needed to open the computer. Well ... the names of the 3 Heads are the Login names and the This, That, Other are the passwords. It differs per game which password belongs to which login name. Leave the Creators Room and go back to the front of the "Top of the Well" and then through the Dome door to the:

Titania Room:

Note: If you had activated the Bomb, first start the countdown again by clicking on the red button in the Bomb Chamber again.

Go past Titania again to the computer / switch cabinet room and zoom in on the computer again.

You must now enter the login name and password in the screen. The login name is one of the 3 names of the 3 Heads from the Creators Room. The password is either This, That or Other. Which of the 3 names and which of the 3 passwords you must use is different per game. So just try it out.

So enter one of the names and then press Enter and enter one of the passwords and press enter again. If it is not correct, try the other two passwords with the same login name. If it is still not good then you try the other 2 login names with the passwords. You then enter the computer files. In the screen of the computer you read through all the emails to understand what the hell is going on this crazy spaceship. Click on the Enter button and on Next and Previous to be able to read all E-mails. When you are done with it, click on Exit and zoom out of the computer. It is time to upgrade your status again. You must now ensure that you become a 1st Class passenger. So follow the route back to the Embarkation Lobby

Chapter 4: Upgrade to 1st Class:
Embarcation Lobby:

Go click on Marsinta's bell again to wake up Marsinta. The Chat O Mat screen of your PET is open. Ask Marsinta now for an Upgrade to first class. So in the Chat O Mat screen type "can I get an Upgrade" and press your Enter key.

Unfortunately .... Marsinta does not want to cooperate and refuses you an Upgrade. Look at the 3 hands of the 3 clocks on the left in the Chat O Mat screen. All three of Marsintha's hands are red and this means that she is totally unwilling. You need to get Marsinta a bit friendlier and more accommodating, but you can't do that here. Leave the Embarcation Lobby and go to "The Backside of the Top of the Well" and then enter the left room. You are now in the:

Sculpter Room:

This is a round room. When you come in here you are faced with a large Plug. In this round room there are glass boxes with statues. All those statues represent the robots that are onboard the Titanic. You must now go to each of the glass booths and then see if you can find the statue that most resembles Marsinta, the BellBot. It is the statue that is in the 3rd box when you go through the right side of the room.

Zoom in on this statue. In the Chat O Mat screen of the PET you see the 3 hands of Marsinta and they are all 3 red.

The statue has 2 triangular buttons. Click on both buttons to make the top 2 hands of Marsinta yellow.
Zoom out and go back to Marsinta in the Embarkation Lobby. Click on the bell again and .... see and hear ... Marsinta suddenly behave a lot friendlier. Ask Marsinta "can I get an Upgrade" again and she will now promote you to 1st Class and give you a 1st Class room. I was assigned room 1, floor 2, elevator 2. Your PET has now been promoted as well and is now nicely colored red walnut.

We are now going to look for the 2nd eye of Titania. Go find a TV. The closest TV is in the Parrot Room so go there. Zoom in on the TV again and turn on the TV with the button in your Remote Thingummy screen. Then put the TV on Channel 4 through the arrow buttons. On Channel 4 you see a Room Designers Number (Chevron) of a 1st Class room, on the ceiling of a room.

You see this Chevron through the eye of Titania that has to be somewhere in that room and you see the Chevron on the TV. You must now copy this Chevron yourself. Marsinta has assigned you a 1st Class Room and you have the Chevron in your Room Designers Numbers screen of your PET. Locate this Chevron and now change this Chevron to the Chevron that you see in the TV.  But remember ... On the TV you see the Chevron REVERSE. 

The Chevrons consist of stripes that are light green and dark green. Light green lines are ON and dark green lines are OFF. You change a line to light or dark by clicking on it with your mouse while holding down the shift key. First turn all light lines on the Chevron in the right-hand box OFF and then turn the Chevron into the inverted Chevron that you see on the TV.

If this is correct then you can read at the bottom of the screen that this is the Chevron for 1st Class Room 3, Elevator 2, Floor 7.

Zoom out of the TV and go back to Elevator 2 of the "Top of the Well" and enter it. Tell the ElevatorBot that you want to go to Floor 7 and the ElevatorBot will take you to Floor 7. Get out of the elevator and you'll be in the  Entree Hall of Floor 7. There is a Golden door on both sides. Go through the Golden Doors and you are in the corridor where the 1st Class rooms are. So there are three 1st Class rooms on each side of the corridor. Stand in front of every door and make sure the Chevron screen of the PET is open. If you are in front of a door then you can read in the PET screen whether you are in front of the right door. You then read in the PET screen: 1st class, Floor 7, Elevator 2, Room 3. Enter the room.

You won't find it more luxurious on board the Titanic. Look around in your beautiful 1st Class Room. You reach the sleeping area through the stairs. There are 4 standing lamps on the stairs. You can click on any of these 4 standing lamps. 1 of these 4 standing lamps, however, breaks when you click on it. Go up the stairs to the bed and then turn around to the 2 lamps at the top of the stairs. Click on the right-hand lamp and .... you hear the lamp bulb break. The top right lamp is now broken.

Open the Chat O Mat screen. To the right of the Chat O Mat screen are the photos of Fentible de DoorBot, and of Krage, the BellBot. 

Click on the photo of Krage to call him here.

Krage appears. In the Chats O Mat screen, type "get the broken light" and Krage unscrews the broken bulb and gives it to you.

This bulb appears to be the 2nd eye of Titania. 

You now own both Eyes from Titania. Leave the room and go to the elevators in the intermediate hall and go back to the "Top of the Well" with one of the elevators.

Note: If you had activated the Bomb, first start the countdown again by clicking on the red button in the Bomb Chamber again.

The Perellator:

If you went with elevator 1 or with elevator 2 then you will end up on the left-hand side of the "Top of the Well" and then you will be standing in front of the Perellator. If you went with elevator 3 or 4, you will arrive at the right-hand side of the "Top of the Well" and you have to walk to the left-hand side. Stand in front of the Perellator. In your Remote Thingummy screen, select the Perellator and press the Call button.

You end up in the Perellator. Well ... this is a kind of subway cabin. 

On both walls there is a map with the "stations" where you can go with the Perellator. Zoom in on the map through your magnifying glass.

There are 6 locations where you can go through the Perellator. You will see a white button next to each location. By clicking on the white buttons, next to the locations,  you choose the location where you want to go. We now go to the Bar first. The Bar location is the bottom left photo on the map. So click on the white button of the Bar and .... the Perrelator starts moving and stops at the Bar. Click the forward arrow above the location map to step out of the Perellator. You end up in:

Chapter 5: Titanic Tittilator Cocktail

The Coctail Bar:

You have arrived at the Bar through the Perellator and you're looking straight at the bar counter. The BarBot is behind the counter. On the bar is the TV. To the right of the bar is the Succ-U-Bus at the wall. Go forward to the bar. Between the bottles that are in the bar cabinet is also Titania's Vision Center, but you can't get it

Turn left, 1 click forward and turn right again and you will be right in front of the Barbot and the TV. Zoom in on the TV and then turn on the TV, again through the button on your Remote Thingummy screen. The recipe for the "Titanic Tittillator" cocktail now appears in the TV. Note down the ingredients for this drink because you have to mix it yourself to make the BarBot drunk with it

You need: 4 sizes of Signurian Vodka, 2 sizes of Lemon Juice, a shattered TV, 1 pureed Flock or Starling (Pigeons).

Zoom out. You cannot talk to the BarBot by clicking on it. To be able to talk with the BarBot you have to click on the bell on the counter. So turn right and go 1 click forward and turn left and you are back at the front of the bar. Click on the Bell. The BarBot comes to you and puts an empty glass on the counter

Grab the glass and put it in the PET. Talk to the BarBot about the ingredients of the drink. So type the names of the ingredients as you saw them on the TV. Also ask the BarBot "get Titania's Vision Center", but the BarBot refuses to give you the thing .... he first wants the Titanic Titillator cocktail. To get Titania's Vision Center you have to make the BarBot drunk and for this you need the ingredients for the "Titanic Tittillator" drink. So turn around and go to the Perellator and enter the Perellator again through your Remote Thingummy screen. 

In the Perellator you zoom in again on the location map and then click on the white button of the "Top of the Well" location. That is the location in the middle below. When the Perellator has stopped again, get out. Turn to the left and go to the front of the "Top of the Well". Note that you can now enter the long hall at the front of the "Top of the Well", but we are not doing that yet. Turn left and go to the

Parrot Room / Bottom of the Well:

Go to the TV at the bird cage and call the Krage, the BellBot. 

In the Chat O Mat screen, type "throw the television down the well", and Krage grabs the TV and .......

The crazy Kragge is going to throw the TV down through the shaft of the Well. So go to Elevator 3, right-hand side "Top of the Well". Call Elevator 3 through your Remote Thingummy screen and tell the ElevatorBot that you want to go to "Bottom of the Well" and the Elevator will deliver you there again. Get out of the elevator and follow the passage to the bottom of the shaft. In the middle of the floor is the broken TV, which Krage threw down. Go 1 click forward and then turn left or right and naturally you will look down at the TV. Grab the TV and place the thing in your PET.

Go back up with Elevator 3 and when you are back up, go to the front of the "Top of the Well" and then down the Dome to:

Titania's Room:

Note: If you had activated the Bomb, first start the countdown again by clicking on the red button in the Bomb Chamber again.

Go to the computer room and go through the 3 doors of the control cabinet so that you can see the fuses and the buttons again. Take the Blue Fuse from your inventory and place it between the blue wires and then click on the Blue Button. Then click on the Yellow Button and then grab the Yellow Fuse and put it in your inventory.

Zoom out and return to the Perellator, on the left-hand side of the "Top of the Well". Step back in the Perellator through your Remote Thingummy screen and zoom in again on the location map. Click on the white button on the top left to go to the Promenade Deck with the Perellator. When the Perellator has stopped again you have to turn around because you have to get out on the other side. So get out of the Perellator and you are on:

The Promenade Deck:

Turn left. You see a large Ventilator and you hear a lot of screeching. Go forward to the ventilator. 

You then stand in front of the ventilator control and a flock of pigeons comes your way.

So these are the Starling birds. The ventilator control is off.

Click on the ON button to turn on the ventilator and then click on the Speed button until the pointer of the controller is at the far right and ......

The flock of birds is now pulverized by the large ventilator into pulp and that pulp disappears through a hole in the floor.

Turn left and go back to the Perellator and go back in and travel back to the "Top of the Well". Back on the left of the "Top Of The Well" you go into elevator 1 and tell the Elevatorbot that you want to go to one of the SGT-Class floors. These are floors 28 to 38, so type Floor 28. Then get out of the elevator on one of the SGT-Floors and go straight to the door of the Restaurant. Open the door and you will see the Sauce Dispenser again.

On top of the dispenser cupboard you can see three taps. Right next to those 3 taps you see a Yellow Bar. 

Click on that Yellow Bar and ... a Fried Chicken will now appear in the top right box.

SAVE YOUR GAME NOW because you have to act quickly and if things go wrong you cannot get another chicken. Make sure your Personal Luggage (Inventory) screen is open and then make sure you can quickly grab the Empty Glass. Grab the Chicken from the top right box and now place the chicken in the box under the left tap. Immediately grab the empty glass from your inventory and hold the glass under the chicken so that the glass is filled with the purple Starling Puree that now comes out of the dispenser.

You then have a glass with purple Starlings puree. And now you also have a chicken

 NB: if you were too slow with the glass then you have to load your save game to try again 

Zoom out and dive into the elevator and go back up to the "Top of the Well" . Enter the Perellator again and ride the Perellator back to the:

Promenade Deck:

Turn left again when you step out of the Perellator. To the left of the ventilator control is a large shiny capsule. Go forward again to the ventilator controller and then turn left. You will look up at the top of the capsule. There is a blue button on top of the capsule. Grab the Perch, which you took from the bags in the parrot room, and now click 3 times with the perch on the blue button on top of the capsule. You always have to take the perch out of your inventory to click on the button again. The capsule will then open. There is a hammer in the capsule. Grab the hammer and place the thing in your inventory. 

Turn left and go back to the Perellator and ride with the Perellator back to the "Top of the Well". Dive into elevator 1 again and go to one of the SGT floors (28 to 38) again. Get out of the elevator into the SGT corridor. Turn to the right and go to the door at the end of the corridor and go through the door. You are in the small Lounge room. You can click on the photo that is on the wall, but it doesn't bring you anything. Turn to the left. To the right of the door you see a Stick hanging in a glass container.

Zoom in and break the glass with the Hammer and then grab the Stick.

You now have a Long Stick. Go back, with the elevator, to the "Top of the Well".

Go to the long hall at the front of the "Top of The Well". Previously you could not enter this hall. This hall is the:

Arboretum:

Note: If you had activated the Bomb, first start the countdown again by clicking on the red button in the Bomb Chamber again.

Go straight ahead, between the burning fire pots, into the hall. You end up at the Channel. A Gondola floats in the Channel.

Click with your magnifying cursor on the gondola to sit in it. Then click the forward arrow and you will sail naturally, while enjoying the gondolier's song, through the long channel to the other side of the Arboretum.

When the gondola is docked again, turn left and click the forward arrow to step out of the gondola. Go forward to the Fern door.

The Ferns open and you look into the Lemon Garden. Take the Long Stick from your inventory and then click with the stick on one of the yellow lemons, hanging on the trees. You have to click on the right lemon. Put the stick away again and then grab the lemon that now floats at the bottom of your screen.

At the bottom of your screen you can see the Season Clock. With this clock you can make it Summer, Fall, Winter and Spring in the garden. The Clock is now on Summer. However, the Clock cannot be used at the moment. Turn to the right and then go forward to the right corner. In the right corner is an entrance to the Perellator.

Go there and get into Perellator and go back to:.

The Cocktail Bar:

Go to the bar counter and press the bell again. The BarBot pops up again for you. 

Now give the BarBot successively the Lemon , the TV and the glass of Pureed Starlings.

The BarBot puts the lemon and the TV in its head but if you give the Glass with Starlings Puree then it asks what this is. So type in "Pureed Starlings" and he accepts this too. Then ask the BarBot "Get the Vodka" and ........ the BarBot will now mix the drink and drink it up. The BarBot is going to run like a toll. The 3 hands of the BarBot are now yellow, so the BarBot is now very cooperative. Ask the BarBot "Get the vision center" and he will place this part of Titania on the counter for you. Grab the thing and put it in your inventory.

So you now also have Titania's Vision Center. We continue in:

Chapter 6: The Restaurant and the Music Room:
Chapter 6: The Restaurant and the Music Room:

You are still in the Cocktail Bar, where you just scored the Titania Vision Center after making the Barbot drunk. Turn around and get back in the Perellator. Zoom in again on the location map and then click on the white button of the lower right location and the Perellator will deliver you again in the right corner of the Arboretum

Arboretum:

Get out of the Perellator and turn right and go 2 clicks forward to the corner on the other side. There is also a Perellator door in this corner.

Only this is not a Perellator but a cupboard. Click forward to open the door. 

In the cupboard you will find the Succ-U-Bus booth and a fire hose. Grab the Fire hose and put it in your inventory.

Now go back to the Parrot Room. You can sail back in the Gondola to the other side or go with the Perellator back to The Top of the Well. Let's go back with the gondola. So turn 2 times to the right and go 1 click forward and then turn right and go forward to the gondola. Get back in the gondola through the down arrow

The Gondolier is happy that he has a customer again and starts to sing O Solomio again.

Turn around and then click the forward arrow to be sailed back to The Top of the Well

When the gondola has docked again, turn left and go 1 click forward and you are back in front of the Top of the Well. Turn clockwise and go to the:

Parrot room:

Note: If you had activated the Bomb, first start the countdown again by clicking on the red button in the Bomb Chamber again.

Go ahead to the bird cage and then turn right and go forward to the Succ-U-Bus.

Open the glass door of the Succ-U-Bus. Take the Fire hose from your inventory and put the hose reel in the container of the Succ-U-Bus. Succ-U-Bus now blows through the fire hose. In your inventory you will then have "The Other End of a Hose". Turn clockwise. Right next to the Succ-U-Bus you see a golden Lamp. Use the "Other End of the Hose" on the bottom of the lamp and..........

 Titania's Nose comes up from the lamp. Grab Titania's Nose and place it in your inventory.

Leave the Parrot Room (the fire hose will automatically return to your inventory) and go to the Perellator, on the left side of the "Top of the Well". Call the Perellator through your Remote Thingummy screen and in the Perellator you zoom in again on the location map. Now click on the button of the top right location and you will be delivered to the:

1st Class Restaurant:

Get out of the Perellator and you will be in the round reception hall of the 1st Class Restaurant. There is a small counter in front of you. Turn to the left and then enter the restaurant through the big red door and then continue to the back. You now meet the Matre d'Bot. Matre is completely mix up and he says he hates the music you hear in the background.

Click a little bit on the backside of the Matre so that he starts to move. Matre gets angry and wants to fight with you. You then see, on the left next to the head, the torso with the right arm of the Matre. Titania's Auditory Center sits in the right arm. Grab the right arm of the Matre.

You are not allowed to do anything else here. You are not allowed to sit at any table and you cannot get Titania's Auditory Center out of the right arm. You must first ensure that the Matre hears music that does appeal to him. Behind the Matre, by the large window, is a lonely table. Go forward to that table. A guy is sleeping at the table. It is Scraliontis. The Matre does not allow you to take a seat. Turn around and walk back to the round reception hall and step back into the Perellator. Zoom in again on the location map and now click on the button of the location in the middle left and you will be delivered to the:

Music Room:

Get out of the Perellator. You will arrive in the front hall of the Music room. Go through the door and you are in the actual Music Room. You will see the Orchestra in front of you. Turn right. In the right corner is a gramophone player. Turn left twice. There are two chairs in the left corner.

Go to the two chairs. You see signs on the red cushions of the two chairs. They are the positions of the sliders and the buttons of the Music Control Panel.

Try to draw those signs over because these two seat cushions have the correct positions of the sliders. You can't see the top left slider on the seats, but that's okay because the slider and the 2 buttons are already good on the panel. Turn right and then go forward to the orchestra. You will then be zoomed in on the Control Panel of the instruments.

On the panel you see 8 blue sliders and 8 yellow buttons. You now have to put the blue sliders and the yellow buttons in exactly the same position as you saw them on the cushions of the 2 chairs. You also see 4 green lights that are already lit. Do NOT turn off these 4 green lights. The 2 top left sliders and buttons are already positioned correctly and you cannot change them. 

You move the blue sliders by clicking on them. You change the position of the Yellow Buttons by clicking on them. If you have all 8 sliders and the Yellow Buttons in the correct position then click on the Red Button to let the Orchestra play the music. If all goes well you will hear a good and pure piece of music. This is how it should be

Click the Red Button to stop the orchestra again. Turn to the Gramophone clockwise. Go forward to the Gramophone.

The gramophone has a large ear as a horn. This ear is the 2nd Ear of Titania but you cannot get it now. If you are standing in front of the Gramophone you look down through the down arrow. You will then see the Role of the Gramophone and you will see 3 buttons. The Right button, with the circle, is the Record button. Click the Record button to start recording

Zoom out and go back to the control panel and press the Red Button again and The orchestra plays the piece again and this is now recorded by the gramophone. Let the orchestra play the song completely. The Orchestra stops automatically when the song is finished.

When the orchestra has completely played the piece of music, go back to the Gramophone and look down again. Now press the left button, the square, to stop recording. Click on the middle button, the triangle, to listen to the recording and listen to it to the end. You really have to let the recording play to the end ...... Then press the left button twice and the reel will open. Grab the cylinder from the roll and put it in your inventory. Zoom out and then grab the big Ear of the Gramophone because this is the 2nd Ear of Titania.

Note: you can only grab the Ear if the piece of music you recorded is really good. If not then you can not grab the Ear because you have not set the sliders and / or the buttons on the panel exactly good and you will have to do this again and then do the recording again. Only when you can grab the Ear of the gramophone do you know that the recording is the right recording.

Zoom out, turn right and go back through the doors to the Perellator and go back to the:

1st Class Restaurant:

Note: If you had activated the Bomb, first start the countdown again by clicking on the red button in the Bomb Chamber again.

Get out of the Perellator and enter the restaurant again through the red door. Walk on to the Matre again. Now you have to make sure that you can sit at the table where Scraliontis is sitting. For this you must now defeat the Matre. Now, with your arrow cursor, constantly poke the Matre in its bottom until the Matre says you defeated him. You have to maintain this poking for a while, but in the end you will defeat the Matre. After a few punctures, the Matre gives up and says that you can sit down at the table at Scraliontis. So go forward to the table and zoom in on it.

On the table is the other Arm of the Matre. A Key sticks in the Hand of the Arm. There is also a napkin on the table and under the left hand of Scraliontis is the Green Fuse. Grab the arm of the Matre. Grab the napkin and grab the green fuse. T

urn to the right and leave the restaurant to the front hall. Turn left in the front hall and go to the small counter. You will stand behind the counter. The counter has a roller shutter with a keyhole. Grab the Arm with the Key from your inventory and click it on the keyhole of the roller shutter.

Then click on the roller shutter and it will open. You see 3 brown Cylinders. Below the middle cylinder you see 3 buttons. There is already a gray phonographic cylinder on the left-hand brown cylinder. Click on the right-hand button to open the middle Cylinder. Grab the gray Phonographic Cylinder from the middle cylinder and then put it in the right brown cylinder. Now take the Gray Phonographic Cylinder from your inventory and put it in the middle brown cylinder. Click the right button again to close the middle cylinder and then click the middle button to play the recorded track.

Click the forward arrow and go back to the Matre in the restaurant. If you had really recorded the right piece of music, then .... the Matre will be happy and the Key and Titania's Auditory Center will be released from the hands of the Matre. Both parts and both arms are then separated in your inventory.

Leave the restaurant and go back to the "Top of the Well" with the Perellator. Get out of the Perellator and go to the Parrot Room. Walk to the bird cage and listen for a while to the roar of the parrot. At some point you hear the parrot then shout about a "Hot Chicken". The perch on which the parrot is sitting in its cage is actually Titanias Central Intelligence Core and so you have to get hold of it. You should already have a chicken in your inventory from when you put the Pureed Starlings in the beer glass, but that is now a cold chicken.

Chapter 7: Hot Chicken for the Parrot:

Leave the parrot room again and go with 1 of the 3 Elevators of the "Top of the Well" to a GTS floor (28 to 38). In the GTS corridor, go to the Succ-U-Bus. First you have to get rid of your cold chicken because otherwise you cannot get fresh hot chicken. Put your cold Chicken from your inventory in the Succ-U-Bus. 

Succ-U-Bus eats your cold chicken with taste.  Go up to the sauce dispenser, behind the big door for the elevator.

Click on the yellow stick and another hot fat Chicken will pop into the top right box.

Grab the Chicken and click with the chicken on the napkin in your inventory to clean the chicken.

Then take the chicken from your inventory and click it on the middle of the 3 taps on top of the cupboard. Hot mustard is now put over the chicken.

Now place the chicken in your inventory. You now have a Hot Chicken with Mustard. 

Go back to the Succ-U-Bus and put the chicken back in. Then open your Chevron screen and drag the Chevron from the Parrot Room to the Succ-U-Bus and click on the Send button in your Remote Thingummy screen. The Succ-U-Bus now sends the chicken to the Succ-U-Bus in the Parrot Room. So go back to the:

Parrot room:

Save your Game here.

Go to the Succ-U-Bus and click on the glass door again to open it and then click on the Retrieve button in your Remote Thingummy screen. Succ-U-bus spits out of the container again. Click on the container and you grab the chicken from it. Put the chicken in your inventory again.

Click again with the napkin on the chicken to wipe off the mustard, or click the chicken on the napkin. ........The Parrot does not want any mustard on the hot chicken. The mustard was only used to keep the chicken hot. You now have a Hot Plain Chicken. Go to the bird cage .. Now try to lure the parrot to the left side of the cage, by holding the chicken to the left of the cage, at the height of the perch. The parrot sticks his head out of the cage to eat chicken. Then quickly grab the perch and put it in your inventory and you will have Titania's Intelligence Core.

Note: it may well be that the parrot refuses to immediately put his head out of the cage to grab the chicken. It may well be that it takes too long and then your chicken has become cold again. The parrot will say this. It is then best to load your Save Game to try again from that point. Otherwise you have to go all the way back to a SGT floor for a new Hot Chicken.

If you have managed to take Titania's Intelligence Core out of the bird cage, you will leave the Parrot Room again. Go through the door of the Dome to the:

Titania Room:

Note: If you had activated the Bomb, first start the countdown again by clicking on the red button in the Bomb Chamber again.

Go back to the switch box in the computer room and now place the Green Fuse next to the green button in the switch box.

Then click on the Green Button so that the arrow on the button points to the right.

Return to the "Top of the Well" and enter the Arboretum again and step into a Gondola again.

Arboretum:

Sail again with the Gondola through the canal to the other side. Get out of the Gondola and go to the Fern door again. Click on the Fern door again to open the Fern door. Because you have just placed the Green Fuse in the switch cabinet, the Season Clock will work again. The clock is on Summer, so in the garden it is now summer. Click on the Clock to change the season to Autumn. It starts raining in the garden and the trees become bare and .... in the right tree you see a red "fruit" hanging. That red "fruit" is Titania's Speech Center. Take the Long Stick from your inventory and poker with the stick against the branch that contains the red "fruit" and the thing comes from the branch.

Put your stick back in your inventory and then grab the red Speech Center and put it with your other things in your inventory. 

Turn 2 times to the right and go forward and step back into the gondola and ...... You now see that there are 2 Gondolas floating in the canal here. One is the gondola that is moored right in front of the fern door and where you are now sitting in. But on the right, in the corner in front of the cupboard where you unpacked the fire hose, there is another gondola.

The Gondolier of that 2nd gondola has Titania's Mouth, but you cannot reach that gondola.

Turn around again to the fern door, open the fern door again and now change the season to Winter.

Everything becomes white and icy. Turn right again 2 times and see ... the channel is now frozen. 

Turn right and go to the cupboard in the right corner.

Then turn right and .......... now you can move forward to the gondola that is in front of the cupboard in the canal. De Gondolier sings the highest song. Click on the breastplate of the Gondolier. The breastplate opens and you see 2 levers. You have to pull those two levers down and then you can grab the mouthpiece of the Gondolier. To lower the two levers you need the Arms of the Matre. So click, one by one, the arms on the 2 levers. Both levers are then completely lowered. Then grab the Gondolier's Mouthpiece and you have Titania's Mouth. Also take the arms back.

Go back to the fern door, open the fern door again and click on the Season clock again and change the season to Summer or Spring again. Step into the gondola and sail back to the "Top of the Well". You now have all 11 parts of Titania. So you can now put Titania together. So go to the Titania Room

Chapter 8: Titania, the Bridge and the End:

Titania's Room:

Note: If you had activated the Bomb, first start the countdown again by clicking on the red button in the Bomb Chamber again.

Stand in front of Titania again and look down. You zoom in on Titania's head again.

Well ... I guess you recognize the holes you need to click Titania's Eyes, Nose, and Mouth. Titania's Ears you click on the long protrusions but not at the end but halfway. Before you place the 4 colored centers, in the 4 white areas, first click Titania's Central Intelligence Core in the round sphere where you see the 4 white areas. The 4 Centers are difficult. You must place it in the correct white area. I think the order of the 4 Centers is always different. For me it was Yellow, Red, Blue, Green.

If you do all this well then Titania comes to life and she stands up and ........

Titania talks to you and she explains a few things and she says, among other things, "Nobody Likes a Smartass".

Titania lies down again and she is now the beating heart of the Titanic. The Bridge Room, behind Titania, is now accessible.

Deactivate the bomb:

If you had activated the Bomb you must now deactivate the Bomb. Titania has just given you the sentence to deactivate the Bomb. It's  "Nobody Likes a Smartass". So if you had activated the Bomb then you first go to the bomb room and zoom in on the Bomb.

If the Timer is almost finished counting down, first click on the Red Button to reset the timer. The Bomb keyboard has 3 rows of boxes. In every box you can click every letter of the alphabet. You must now put the sentence Nobody Likes A Smartass in the boxes. Enter NOBODY in the top row. Enter LIKES A in the middle row (empty box between Likes and A and after the A). Enter SMARTASS in the bottom row. The bomb is then deactivated.

When you have deactivated the bomb, go through the glass door behind Titania. So you do that even if you don't play the Bomb Puzzle.

You automatically get into a rail cart that you go through a long tunnel and you deliver to:

The bridge:

Go forward to the steering wheel. When you are in front of the steering wheel, turn right. 

You see the Navigation controller. Go to the Navigation controller.

Take the photo, from your house, from your inventory and put the photo in the slot of the navigation controller. Open the Remote Thingummy Screen of your PET. The Remote Thingummy screen now shows the photo of the Navigation controller. Select the photo and press the button on the right to turn on the Navigation controller.

You now look through the controller at the starry sky. There is a square box in the middle of your screen. Your PET now contains the photo of your house and the SET DESTINATION button and 3 round lights that are now off ........ A Purple planet appears in the square box. You must now always switch between your House and the starry sky and you do that by pressing your TAB key. First switch to your home. Above your house you can also see the Starry Sky.

The intention is that you now click on 3 stars which are in a small triangle relative to each other.

Click on a star in the screen of your house and just above your house. The star will be marked with a red cross.

Press your TAB key to switch to the Starry Sky. Now you have to look up the highlighted star. The star that you have marked above your house is now marked as a diamond in the Starry Sky. Make sure your arrow cursor stays in the square area and slowly move your mouse back and forth and up and down to scroll through the square box through the starry sky until you see the little Diamond. You must then let the Red Cross coincide with the Diamond. As soon as you have the red cross close to the diamond, a line appears between the red cross and the diamond.

The 1st light in the PET will then flash. Then quickly press your L key on your keyboard to record the coordinates of this 1st star. The red cross and the diamond naturally melt together.

NB: You do not have to move your cursor out of the square surface with your arrow cursor, because then you cannot move the square surface slowly back and forth, or up and down, it will go way too fast and you will then find it very difficult to find the diamond. So stay inside the square with your arrow cursor and then move your mouse back and forth and up and down to move the square through your screen as slowly as possible to move the diamond.

Press your TAB key again to switch back to the screen with your Cottage. Select another star and switch back to the Starry Sky. Find the 2nd Star, which again has the shape of a diamond, and make sure that the red cross is attached to the diamond again through a line. The 2nd light will blink, so quickly press your L key again to capture this 2nd star. Switch again, through your TAB-Key, to your house and select a 3rd star. The 3 selected stars must therefore form a triangle above your house. Switch back to the starry sky and find the 3rd star and make sure that the red cross and the star coincide again.

The 3rd light will start blinking, so quickly press your L-Key again to register this 3rd star.

SET DESTINATION Button Switch back to your Cottage and now click on the  to capture all 3 coordinates

Click on the Navigation Controller's Photo to deactivate the Controller. Turn left and go back to the steering wheel. 

Turn right and click forward to the steering wheel. 2 red lights now flash above the steering wheel.

Click with your narrow arrow cursor on the top red flashing light and ..... the Titanic starts moving and you see, at the bottom right, the Milky way Galaxy appear. However, the Titanic passes the galaxy and then stops. Zoom in again on the flashing red lights above the steering wheel and then click on one of those two lights and .... The Titanic now goes further into the galaxy and planet Earth appear.

The Titanic lands and on Earth at your destroyed house. 

You will now see Douglass Adams on your TV again, congratulating you on having repaired the Titanic.

You get on board again and fly away.

THE END.</adventureguide>

<ultimateguide>Ultimate Walkthrough by Crash
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
The Arrival
The Parrot and The Pistachios
Mixing a Drink (1st Class Drink)
The Orchestra
Hot Chicken and A Bizzare Weather
Return to Reality
Titania's Part Table

INTRODUCTION
"The ship that could not possibly go wrong ....."
That's the begining of this 'short and easy' adventure (it should have been an interesting game if not because of the short story). Basically you have to collect several parts of Titania's body that were scattered around the ship (ears, nose, eyes, etc), assembly them, then use Titania to fly back to your homeworld. Sounds too easy ??? Let's just see if it's really that simple ........
As usual to begin an adventure game, you have to insert the Starship Titanic CD in your computer (yeah..... I'm not joking. It's actually happen inside the game). Anyway, the Titanic ship will crash down and land at your house. Now it's up to you to fix this big ship and come back safely to your house. Answer all the question and don't forget to bring your picture of the house. Climb in and enter the elevator. Push that top button and you're ready to begin this adventure.

THE ARRIVAL
Main Goal : Find your room and settle down
Q : What should I do in this big lobby ?
A : Go to the receptionist desk and talk to the DeskBot. Choose whatever room style that you like because in the end you'll have your Super Galactic Traveller class room (the style will only point to different rooms but in the same class).

Q : Where is my room ?
A : Look at your Super Galactic Traveller card and go to the appropriate elevator at the Top of the Well. There are 4 elevators there. Choose the one that you're assigned. When you've already at the correct floor, you could look up to see where's your room. Use the small elevator in each column to climb up if your room in the second or first row.

Q : I want to watch TV in my room. How could I do that ?
A : Use your PET to make it happen. Choose this order : 'Deploy the Personal Maintenance hub, Horizontal Worksurface, Horizontally Mobile Storage Compartment, and The Fully Recumbent Relaxation Device. Inflate the Bed and finally Operate the Visual Entertainment Device'. Now you could climb on your bed and watch the TV. Pffuuuhhh, that much effort for only watching the TV ???

Q : In Channel 3 I see a free magazine. Where could I get it ?
A : Go out from your room and go to the Succ-U-Bus at the corner of the alley. Press 'receive' to get your magazine.

Q : The Succ-U-Bus doesn't work. What should I do ?
A : It said something about the central device doesn't work. Ask the Bot about it and find out that there's a Mother Succ-U-Bus somewhere in the ship. It control all the Succ-U-Bus machine in the ship. It seems that she's sick right now so she couldn't work properly.

Q : Where is this Mother Succ-U-Bus ?
A : It's inside the Bilge room. You could access this room via the Service elevator inside the Embarkation Lobby. Push the appropriate elevator button.

Q : What should I do to help her .... errrr it ?
A : Something blocks its mouth. Go to Parrot Room at the Top of the Well. Grab the parrot and then leave the room. The parrot will be fly away and you'll be left with a feather. Activate Mother Succ-U-Bus and put the feather in the tray, the press 'Send'. That should do it. Get the Titania's Olfactory Center and the Blue Fuse from it. Now you could received your free magazine from the Succ-U-Bus upstair.

Special Note : This move is an optional only

Q : How do I disarm the bomb in the room beside Titania's room ?
A : Remember what the BellBot tell you ?? Nobody likes a smart ass .... That's the word that you should set on the bomb's keyboard to disarm it.

THE PARROT AND THE PISTACHIOS
Main Goals : Find Titania's eye and ear
Q : How could I upgrade to 2nd Class Passenger ?
A : It's easy. Just bring the magazine to the DeskBot and she'll give you an upgrade.

Q : What's really going on in this ship anyway ?
A : In one of the room in Titania's floor (the one that has a fusebox in it), you'll find a computer. If you could find a way to check the E-mail inside that computer, you'll know exactly what has happened with the ship. You could use the staircase at the Top of The Well to access Titania's floor.

Q : What are the passwords to that E-mails ?
A : The passwords are hidden inside the Creator's room. The passwords are written behind that three busts (remember the name of each busts and its position, you'll need them as a username). You have to find a way to break those busts. A clue : 'maybe a short circuit may help'.

Q : How could I break the busts ?
A : Go to Fuse room. Open the fusebox, turn the red switch sideways, and remove the red fuse. That will 'break' the lever in Creator's room. Go back to Creator's room and pull down the lever next to the entrance door. That will blow away the busts. Now read all those passwords : THIS, THAT, and OTHER. Now head back to the computer in Fuse room. Log in. The username are : BROBOSTIGON, LEOVINUS, and SCRALIONTIS. Read all the E-mails. It will tell you about Titania and the important role of the parrot. After all this parrot has a use.
Q : One of the elevator at The Top of The Well isn't working. How could I repair it ?
A : Most probably, the broken elevator is number 4. Head to the Bottom of the Well via one of the elevator that available (simply by typing 'Bottom of the Well' when the LiftBot ask you). Get the LiftBot head on the floor. Now check channel 5 (you could use any TV, like in the Parrot Room). Notice the floor number. Now take the elevator next to the broken one to the floor you saw on TV. From that floor, you could enter the broken elevator. Take the sphere (hey .... it's Titania's Eye) and replace it with LiftBot head. Now it's working properly.
Q : The parrot keep on whining about 'pistachios'. What the heck is that ?
A : If you've gone to your room (your 2nd Class room), you'll notice that there's a food called 'pistachios' on the bowl next to the bed. You couldn't bring the pistachios to the parrot, so how about ...... bring the parrot to the pistachios.

Q : How could I bring the parrot to my room ? He won't come out from the Parrot room.
A : Use the Succ-U-Bus in the parrot room. Grab the parrot and put him in the Succ-U-Bus tray. Then press 'Send'. Now head to your 2nd Class room and straight to your personal Succ-U-Bus. Press 'receive' and take the cylinder. The parrot will be freed and fly inside the room. If you are in the correct room, as soon as you click on the bowl of pistachios, the parrot will fly to it and eat them. Click on the handle to release the bowl. Get the bowl. Hey .... it's Titania's ear.

MIXING A DRINK(1st CLASS DRINK)
Main Goals : Get Titania's eye and nose
Q : How could I upgrade to 1st Class ?
A :Easy, go ask the DeskBot again. But this time ....... she's not that co-operative.

Q : How could I make the DeskBot more cooperative ?
A : Go to the Sculpture room and adjust the two sliders on her statue there (at least ... just like her) until the setting on the side of your PET turn to yellow. Now you could ask her again for an upgrade (keyword : 'Can I have an upgrade ? / I need an upgrade').

Q : What should I do now, there's nothing in my 1st class room ?
A : Turn on the TV and watch channel 4. Notice that it views one of the First Class room (this TV must be connected to Titania's eye). Re-create your designer room number with the one you saw through the TV (remember: It's a MIRROR, so re-create it upside-down). Do that by holding your SHIFT key and clicking on the room chevron. Go to this room (it's always be at Floor 7, Elevator 2, and Room 3).	
Q : Where's the eye ?
A : Examine carefully at those four lights at the center. One of them is loose. Call the BellBot and tell him to 'Get the broken light'. That's it : the Titania's eye.
	Q : What should I do now ?
A : Now you could go to the bar through the Pellerator (in front of the elevator). Look at the TV and remember those recepies. You need to make that mixed drink. Ring the bell and take that empty glass on the bar.
Q : Where could I get 'Crushed Television' ?
A : First you have to crush a TV first. Go to Parrot Room (Top of the Well) and call the BellBot. Order him to 'Throw the TV'. Go to the bottom of the well via the elevator and take the crushed Television. Don't delay your move or you'll loose it.

Q : Where could I get the Pureed Starlings ?
A : Find a chicken to produce one (it should be a lot at the Promenade deck. You could check it out). Go to Titania's room and enter the Fuse room. Insert the blue fuse, turn the blue knob sideways, and take the yellow fuse. It should wreck the fan at Promenade deck. Now use the Pellerator and go to Promenade deck. Approach the fan. Turn it on and set the speed to fast. The fan will slash the chickens. Go back to the Top of the Well and head to any restaurant in SGL Class floor (28-35). Click the switch for a chicken (beside the door) and then insert the chicken under the leftmost dispenser. Use the empty glass under the chicken to get the Pureed Starlings.
	
Q : Where could I get the lemon ?
A : If you ask about a lemon to the DoorBot, he'll tell you to go to Arboretum. Take the Gondola at the Top of the Well (near the Parrot Room) to the Arboretum. Open the curtain. You'll see a lemon tree. Hmmm... your arm is not long enough.
Q : Where could I find a stick to get the lemon ?
A : There's one at the Parrot Room but it's not long enough. There's also another long stick at SGT Class Floor (inside a glass case in the small back room). You'll need something to break the case: a HAMMER.

Q : Where could I get the hammer ?
A : Get the short stick on the bags in Parrot room. Bring it to Promenade deck and approach the Hammer Dispenser. Use it to push the button (3 times, you'll hear a sound each time you make a correct move) and get the hammer. Go to the small back room at SGT Class Floor. Break the case with the hammer. Get the long stick and go to Arboretum. Knock the lemon off the tree with the stick. Take it and go directly to the Restaurant.

Q : How could I make the bartender mix the drink ?
A : Ring the bell and give all the ingredients to the BarBot. Answer : 'Pureed Starlings'. Tell him to 'Get the vodka'. He'll make the drink. When he's drunk grab that Titania's piece on the bar.

Q : There must be something about the parrot. He keeps on saying don't go near the broken light.
A :He's giving you a clue. If someone said don't go nearby, just GO THERE. Examine the broken light in the Parrot Room. Something's wrong here, hmmm did I see something stuck in there ?? Go to Arboretum and grab the hose on the left wall. Go back to Parrot Room and stick the hose to the light. Insert the other end to the Succ-U-Bus. Watch him blow the hose. Go back to that broken light fixture and get Titania's nose !!!

THE ORCHESTRA
Main Goals : Get Titania's Auditory Center
Q : The Maitre'D Bot in the restaurant is in a bad mood. Something wrong with him, maybe because the music is bad ... How could I fix it ?
A : Try to find a substitute for that. Go to the Music Room. You'll see chairs and a control panel there. You have to copy the settings on the chairs on the control panel. Then press the red button to make a good music. Sounds easy ... It's actually very easy .....

Q : What is the easy way to compose a good music ?
A : The answer is on the back cover of your gamebox. Look at this picture to help you.

	When you've set everything right, all the green lights should be lit. All four instruments will stop at the same time with a 'ping' sound. Turn around and approach the phonograph. Press 'record (the circle button)' and go back to control panel again and play the music until it reach the end. Turn around again and push 'stop (the square button)'. Play it again to make sure (the triangle button). Eject the cylinder (push the square button twice) and take it. Don't forget to take the phonograph ear, which is the Titania's ear.
Q : Where is the key to unlock the music box outside the restaurant ?
A : The key is inside the restaurant, on Scranliontis' table. But .... you have to pass Maitre'D Bot first.
Q : How could I pass the Maitre'D Bot ?
A : Rip out his arm and keep on poking him at his buttock until he gives up. He'll start complaining if you hit the right spot. After you defeat him, he'll allow you to sit at Scraliontis' table. Take the napkin, the green fuse, and Maitre'D Bot's other arm. His arm is holding the key to unlock the musicbox outside. Go out and unlock the box. Eject the cylinder and replace it with the one you have. Then play it. If your music is good, you'll see Maitre'D Bot relax again in the restaurant. He'll give you the Titania's Auditory Center. If not you have to re-record it again in the music room.

HOT CHICKEN AND A BIZZARE WEATHER
Main Goals :Get the final parts of Titania
Q : I couldn't get that stick inside the parrot's cage. What should I do ?
A : Try to distract the parrot first with something he likes: Hot Chicken. Go get one. Get Designer Room number of the Parrot Room first (you'll need this for the Succ-U-Bus later to send the chicken). Go to the Fuse room and turn the yellow knob sideways. Get the yellow fuse. This will mess up the chicken dispenser in front of the SGT restaurant. Go to that chicken dispenser and flip the switch for a chicken. Get the chicken.

Q : I'm not fast enough. The chicken get cold when I reach the parrot room. What should I do ?
A : Use the Succ-U-Bus to send the chicken (you have to throw away the cold chicken first. Use the Succ-U- Buss to throw away the chicken). Use your designer room number for the parrot room to set the destination.

	Q : The Succ-U-Bus doesn't accept the chicken. What should I do ?
A : Use your napkin first on that chicken to make 'plain' chicken. When you receive it at the parrot room, use the napkin one more time.
Q : The parrot doesn't want this hot chicken. What should I do ?
A : You have to give him a special chicken, not just hot chicken. Use your napkin on the chicken to get plain chicken, then use the chicken at the middle dispenser to coat it with mustard. That should do it, hot chicken with mustard .... hmmmm ... yummy ...

Q : How could I get that stick inside the parrot cage ?
A : Try to lute the parrot to the leftmost part of the cage with that chicken. After he grab the chicken, quickly get the stick. That's Titania's Central Intelligence Core. You have to be quick enough to do that. Use the save and restore facilities if you have trouble with this problem.
Q : Where could I get the last Titania's parts ?
A : According to the DeskBot, there's something wrong with the RowBot's voice. This might be a clue for you. Both parts (Titania's speech center and mouth are located in this area, but you have to do something with the season's control panel first).

Q : How could I make the season's control panel working ?
A : Go to the fuse room and and stick the green fuse. Turn the green knob. Go to Arboretum. Approach the control panel and change the season to Fall. Hey ... that's another Titania's part. Use the long stick to knock it free from the tree. Get the Titania's speech center.

Q : How could I fix the RowBot's voice ?
A : There's nothing you could do with his voice. In fact you have to get his mouth !! Change the season into winter. The entire place will be frozen. Approach the RowBot. Hey .. he's frozen also. Click on his chest. There're 2 switches here.

Q : How could I operate those switches ? Everytime I flip one down, the other will flip up ...
A : Use 'extra hands' to do that. Use Maitre's Bot's hands to flip the switches. Remember both hands should be empty before you do that. Now the RowBot will stop singing. Get his mouth. That's Titania's mouth, the last part of Titania. To leave this area, change the weather to any other weather beside winter.

RETURN TO REALITY
Main Goals :Assembly Titania and fly back home
	Q : What should I do with these Titania's parts (11 parts of them) ?
A : Go to Titania's room and put them all into Titania. Look at this picture on the left side to help you. When you have assembly Titania, the door behind it will be opened and you'll enter the Bridge.
Q : What should I do with that strange machine with helmet on it ?
A : That's the navigation control. Use the photo from home in the slot and use your PET to activate the control. On the screen you have to draw a triangular position (3 points) of the stars based on your photo. Here is how it works. First, choose the first star (any star from your photo) then return to starview. Find the star (line up the cross and the diamond shape until the coordinate light start blinking) and lock (push 'L') the coordinate. Choose the second star and the third star. Do the same sequence, then press "Set Destination". To help you choosing the easy one, look at this picture.

After all the coordinates has been set, exit the helmet and go to the wheel. Push "Go". Watch the endings.

TITANIA'S PARTS TABLE
Part's Name	Room	Exact Location
Titania's Olfactory Center	Bilge Room	Mother Succ-U-Bus
Titania's Eye	Broken Elevator (#4)	The LiftBot's sphere
Titania's Ear	Your 2nd Class Room	Pistachios bowl
Titania's Eye	Your 1st Class Room	Broken center light
Titania's Piece	Bar (use Pellerator)	Shelf behind the counter
Titania's Nose	Parrot Room	Broken light fixture
Titania's Ear	Music Room	The phonograph's ear
Titania's Auditory Center	Restaurant	Maitre'D Bot
Titania's Central Intelligence Core	Parrot Room	Parrot's cage
Titania's Speech Center	Arboretum	Tree (Fall season)
Titania's Mouth	Arboretum	RowBot's mouth (Winter)</ultimateguide>

<puzzlesolutions>**Puzzle Solutions**
Solutions for all puzzles (both mandatory and optional) throughout the game.

Introduction
Welcome to the Starship Titanic, the classic adventure puzzle game that spun off from a throwaway line in Life, the Universe, and Everything. The Starship Titanic is a "majestic and luxurious cruise-liner" which "did not even manage to complete its very first radio message - an SOS - before undergoing a sudden and gratuitous total existence failure".

This game is a puzzle game, and as such this guide will spoil the whole thing. I strongly recommend against reading this guide unless you are utterly stuck, and you're unable to get any clues from the robots (Krage the BellBot mostly exists to give clues, and his ability to give clues is often tied to the room you're in).
Things missing from the Steam version
There are a three notable things owners of the original game have that Steam players do not.
The back side of the original game box contained the solution to the Music Room puzzle hidden in plain view. There is an obscure hint to this solution in the game itself, but the game box literally shows the solution. The Music Room puzzle has millions of possible configurations, and checking the solution takes almost 2 minutes. I do not recommend attempting the puzzle blindly.
The game instruction manual includes the controls for the final puzzle of the game. These controls are not described anywhere within the game. However, you can also skip this puzzle by having the ship's computer do it for you.
The game came with a pair of 3D glasses, intended to be used while solving the final puzzle. They are not necessary, they simply make the visuals more interesting. Any red-blue 3D glasses you happen to have lying around ought to work, though.
Your PET
Near the beginning of the game, Edmund Lucy Fentible, the DoorBot, will give you a Personal Electronic Thingy. This is your user interface for the game. Icons along the right side of your PET will let you switch between its available modes.

Chat-O-Mat
This is where you talk to the various robots on the ship. Their responses will also appear here in a text log you can refer back to.

When interacting with a bot, you can type anything you like. There is a surprisingly sophisticated language processor in this game (for its time), and the bots have over 14 hours' worth of voiced-over responses, including a large amount of Douglas Adams' particular brand of comedy. The majority of things you might call an easter egg can be found here, with the right phrase given to the right bot.

Personal Baggage
Items that you pick up will be here, and you can drag items from your baggage to something in the scene in front of you to use them. Or drag one item onto another to use them on each other.

Remote Thingummy
Any objects you may be able to control in a given room will be controllable here. This includes calling the elevators, sending and receiving items via the Suc-U-Bus system, turning on the TV, etc.

Designer Room Numbers
When you're assigned a room, the chevron pattern associated with that room will be placed here. Selecting a chevron pattern will tell you what room it's for, including theroom's floor and which elevator to use, if applicable.

You can also shift+click on the chevron pattern to the right side of this part of your PET, to get the chevron pattern for a specific room that isn't one you've been assigned. You can drag that chevron pattern to the list to save it.

Finally, when using the Suc-U-Bus system to send items around the ship, you need to drag a chevron pattern onto the Suc-U-Bus to set the destination for the item. If you forget, the item will end up in the Bilge Room with "Mother".

Real Life
This is the game's settings menu, as well as where you can save/load your game and exit.
At Home, or How to Start an Adventure
Turn to your computer, open the CD tray, and insert the Starship Titanic disc (the top one). The Starship Titanic will crash through your roof, and the DoorBot will speak to you, giving you your PET.

The DoorBot will ask you whether you will help; any response other than "yes" will have the DoorBot comment that it's a funny way to spell "yes". You'll be instructed to take the photo off your dresser, and then you'll enter the service elevator.

Press the top button when the DoorBot fails to do so. When the elevator finally reaches the Embarkation Lobby, press the button on the plinth as instructed to get the game's title sequence.

Once the title sequence completes, speak to Marsinta Drewbish, the DeskBot. Answer her questions and you'll eventually be assigned the Super Galactic Traveler class room that the DoorBot secured for you.
Super Galactic Traveler Class
The following puzzles all require being an SGT Class passenger.

Missing Brobostigon
Rewards: Titania's Olfactory Center, Blue Fuse

Enter the Parrot Room (across from the Embarkation Lobby), and drag the parrot to your PET. Leave the room, and the parrot will escape, leaving a feather behind.

Return to the service elevator and press the second button to go to the Bilge Room, where the Mother Suc-U-Bus is.

Activate the Mother Suc-U-Bus, put the parrot feather in her tray, and press "Send". She'll cough up the corpse of Antar Brobostigon, the ship's project manager, who has the Blue Fuse and Titania's Olfactory Center. You'll need to grab both items.

Disarming the Smart Bomb (OPTIONAL)
Rewards: None

The smart bomb is located in one of the alcoves off Titania's room (go up the stairs between the Embarkation Lobby and the Parrot Room, turn around and enter the door, then keep going straight until you reach Titania's room). There's a bright, shiny button you can press which will activate the bomb.

The bomb will begin counting down from 1000. Most interactions with the bomb will cause it to become distracted and start over. If it eventually reaches the end of the countown, it will complain that it's bending over backwards for you, and also start over. The bomb will not cause a game over.

In order to actually stop the bomb from counting down and get the parrot to stop complaining about the bomb, however, you need to diffuse it. You can do so by entering the password, "NOBODY LIKES A SMARTASS".

Second Class Upgrade Lottery
Rewards: Second Class passenger status

Find your SGT room (remeber to check the chevron pattern in your PET), and note that you may need to ride one of the small elevators on your floor to reach it. Use your PET to unfold your bed (personal maintenance hub, horizontal worksurface, horizontally mobile storage compartment, fully recumbent relaxation device) and start up the TV. Turn the TV to channel 3 and you'll get an advertisement about the possibility of a free Second Class upgrade.

Head back outside and visit the nearest Suc-U-Bus. Press "Receive" to get a magazine. Return to the Embarkation Lobby, activate the DeskBot, and give her the magazine for your upgrade.
Second Class
The following puzzles all require being a Second Class passenger.

Repairing the Elevator
Rewards: Titania's Eye, restored elevator

You may have noticed that one of the four elevators in the Well won't let you in. In fact, the Nobby the LiftBot in that elevator has had his head replaced with a piece of Titania.

Take an elevator to the bottom of the Well to find the missing LiftBot head, then find any TV and tune it to channel 5. You'll see the inside of the broken elevator, including the floor the elevator is currently on.

Take the elevator adjacent to the broken one to the indicated floor, and then enter the broken elevator. Swap the LiftBot's head for Titania's Eye.

Backstory Emails (OPTIONAL)
Rewards: None

One of the alcoves off Titania's Room has a fuse box. Open the box, turn the red switch sideways, and remove the Red Fuse.

Head to the Creators' Room (opposite side of the Well from the Parrot Room and the Embarkation Lobby, across from the Statue Room), note the three busts, and activate the lever near the room's entrance.

The message behind each bust ("THIS, "THAT", and "OTHER") is each man's password. Their usernames are the names attached to their busts, "Leovinus", "Scraliontis", and "Brobostigon".

You can access the creators' accounts from the terminal next to the fuse box in Titania's Room, and read their emails for some backstory.

Parrotstachios
Rewards: Titania's Ear

The parrot occasionally whines about pistachios. If you've checked out your Second Class room, you might have noticed several bowls of snacks, including one full of pistachios.

In the Parrot Room, grab the parrot again. Instead of leaving, however, put him in the Suc-U-Bus, and give the Suc-U-Bus the chevron pattern for your Second Class room before hitting "send".

In your Second Class room, hit "receive" from the Suc-U-Bus, and the parrot will be loose in your room. Click on the bowl of pistachios and he'll gobble them up, revealing the bowl to be Titania's Ear.

First Class Upgrade
Rewards: First Class passenger status

You may have noticed when interacting with the bots that there are three dials on the left side of your PET. The top dial is an indicator of how much the bot likes you. The middle dial is how well the bot is functioning. The bottom dial is mostly random and irrelevant.

The Sculpture Room (across from the Creators' Room) has several interactive sculptures. Each one corresponds to a different bot, and fiddling with the levers on the bot will adjust the bot's PET dials (most of the sculptures can only affect the first two dials, but the sculpture that corresponds to the BarBot can affect all three).

Get the DeskBot's disposition towards you high by fiddling with her statue (hell, you might as well get all of the bots' dials high while you're here), then go talk to her. To get a First Class upgrade, simply ask for one while she likes you.
First Class
The following puzzles all require being a First Class passenger.

Mystery Chevron
Rewards: Titania's Eye

Turn any TV to channel 4, and you'll see an upside-down chevron pattern. Create this pattern in your PET to find the room this is referencing.

Go to the indicated room, and you'll notice that one of the four center lights is out and if you click on it, it will be loose. Call the BellBot and ask him to get the broken light for you. The light is actually Titania's Eye.

Tending the Titanic Titillator
Requires: Blue Fuse (see "Missing Brobostigon" puzzle)
Rewards: Titania's Vision Center

This is the longest puzzle in the game, with several smaller sub-puzzles.

Take the Pellerator (the strange brown cylindrical door across from two of the elevators in the Well) to the bar. Look at the TV on the right side of the bar to see the recipe for the Titanic Titillator. Go to the front of the bar and ring the bell for Fortillian Bantoburn O'Perfluous the BarBot's attention. He'll set a glass down by the bell, which you should take. He can give you clues about the parts of the drink recipe, but that's all he's currently good for.

Lemon Juice
In the Parrot Room, grab the perch among the bags.

On the Promenade Deck, use the perch to poke the button above the hammer dispenser several times, until you can get a hammer.

On any SGT Class floor (28-38), the room across from the Suc-U-Bus will have a long stick behind glass. Break the glass with the hammer and take the stick.

At the top of the Well, take a gondola or the Pellerator to the Arboretum. Swing the long stick at the lemons until one drops, and take it.

Crushed Television
From the Parrot Room, convince the BellBot to throw the television down the Well. He'll be quite excited about getting in some destruction.

Take an elevator to the bottom of the well to collect the television.

Pureed Starlings
In the fuse box in Titania's Room, plug in the Blue Fuse. Turn the blue and yellow knobs sideways, and remove the Yellow Fuse.

Take the Pellerator to the Promenade Deck. Approach the fan controls, turn on the fan, and set it to its fastest speed. Watch the starlings get turned into purple goop.

From the Well, take an elevator to any SGT Class floor (28-38). Approach the restaurant directly in front of the elevator, and flick the switch to get a chicken.

Hold the chicken under the left sauce dispenser, and while the purple sauce is falling down, hold the glass underneath to gather pureed starlings. Yum!

You might as well give the chicken to the Suc-U-Bus as well (it will eat the chicken), since you can't get a second chicken while you have one, and the one you have will get too cold to be useful later once you leave this floor.

Mixed Drink
Return to the bar and ring the bell for the BarBot. Give him each of the ingredients you've collected. When you give him the Pureed Starlings, he'll ask what it is; answer him.

Once he's got all of your ingredients, tell him to get the vodka, and he'll make the Titanic Titillator. Unfortunately, he'll consume it himself.

At this point, all the BarBot is really good for is giving you Titania's Vision Center when you ask for it.

Suc-U-Bus Blows
Rewards: Titania's Nose

Go to the Arboretum, and check out the area across from the Pellerator. Behind the fake Pellerator door, you can pick up a hose; do so.

In the Parrot Room, use the hose on the light fixture next to the Suc-U-Bus, the one the parrot tells you to keep away from. You'll get an item representing the other end of the hose; use it on the Suc-U-Bus.

The Suc-U-Bus will blow into the hose for you, knocking Titania's Nose out of the light fixture.

Beautiful Music
Rewards: Titania's Ear

Take the Pellerator to the Music Room. Approach the panel with the knobs and levers. The panel is separated into four segments, each controlling a musician bot. The top-left segment is already configured correctly, and cannot be changed anyway.

The other three segments each have two levers that each have four positions, and two knobs with two positions each, plus a green light that can be on or off. All the lights should be on, and the levers and knobs should be in the following configuration:


Pressing the red button will make the music bots play their song, which is a little less than 2 minutes long.

Go to the phonograph on the other end of the room. Press the circular "record" button, and then return to the music bot control panel and press the red button to make them play. When their song is complete, return to the phonograph and stop the recording (square button). You can double-check that you successfully recorded the music by pressing play (triangle). Eject the phonograph cylinder by hitting the stop button twice, and take the cylinder.

When you back up, take the phonograph ear, which is Titania's Ear.

The Full Restaurant
Requires: Phonograph Cylinder (see "Beautiful Music")
Rewards: Napkin, Green Fuse, Maitre'DBot's arms, Titania's Auditory Center

Take the Pellerator to the First Class Restaurant. Approach the dismantled Maitre'DBot, D'Astragar "D'Astragaaar" D'Astragar.

Take his remaining arm, which has a death grip on Titania's Auditory Center. Continuously poke him in the butt ("My Achilles Buttock!") until he surrenders and allows you to approach Project Finance Director Droot Scraliontis' (deceased) table behind him.

At the table, pick up the Maitre'DBot's other arm (holding the key to the restaurant's music player), the Green Fuse, and the Napkin.

Go to the locked music player near the entrance to the restaurant and use the Maitre'DBot's arm holding the key on it to open it. Eject the phonograph cylinder currently playing, and replace it with the cylinder you just recorded. Press the play button to start the new musical score for the restaurant.

Return to the Maitre'DBot, who will be soothed by the music. His arm will relax enough to let go of Titania's Auditory Center.

Bird-on-Bird Violence
Requires: Napkin (see "The Full Restaurant")
Rewards: Titania's Central Intelligence Core

If you haven't already, turn the yellow knob in Titania's fuse box sideways and remove the Yellow Fuse. Also, use your PET to store the chevron pattern for the Parrot Room.

Take an elevator to any SGT Class floor (28-38) and approach the restaurant in front of the elevators. Flip the switch to receive a chicken.

Wipe the chicken clean of grease with the Napkin, then hold it under the middle dispenser to coat it in mustard, which the Suc-U-Bus won't eat.

Use the Suc-U-Bus to send the chicken to the Parrot Room without getting cold. In the Parrot Room, receive the chicken and wipe off the mustard with the Napkin.

Note! You may want to save the game here, as there is some timing involved in this next bit, and failing means starting this puzle over.

Dangle the chicken to the left of the parrot, and the parrot will scoot over to the left side of his cage to gobble up your treat. While he's eating, grab the perch he was standing on, which is Titania's Central Intelligence Core. If you fail to grab it before the parrot finishes eating, reloading instead of starting the puzzle over is much faster.
First Class (continued)
Changing Seasons
Requires: Maitre'DBot's arms (empty), Green Fuse (see "The Full Restaurant")
Rewards: Titania's Mouth, Titania's Speech Center

Insert the Green Fuse in Titania's fuse box and turn the green knob to the side.

Go to the Arboretum, and now we can change the seasons. Set the season to Autumn, and Titania's Speech Center will hand from a vine. Use the long stick to knock it free, just like you did for the lemon in Summer.

Set the season to Winter, and walk to the fake Pellerator to the left. Turn to the RowBot that you don't normally use to cross the pond, and open his chest to reveal two levers.

Use the Maitre'DBot arms to hold both levers down simultaneously, and you will be able to take his mouth, which is actually Titania's Mouth.

To leave the area, set the season to anything but Winter.
Captain
This is the home stretch; you're almost done. Just two puzzles remain.

Restoring Titania
Requires: Titania's Eye (x2), Titania's Ear (x2), Titania's Nose, Titania's Mouth, Titania's Central Intelligence Core, Titania's Vision Center, Titania's Auditory Center, Titania's Olfactory Center, Titania's Speech Center
Rewards: Bridge access

Go to Titania's Room, and insert all of her various parts (you can insert parts any time you have them, not just after accumulating the entire set). Note that the four "Center" parts must be placed in the correct order:

Yellow	Red
Blue	Green

After Titania wakes, the door immediately next to her will open, leading you to the ship's bridge.

There's No Place Like Home
Requires: Bridge access (see "Restoring Titania")
Rewards: Game completion

You can use the computer on the left side of the room to have Titania solve this puzzle for you. If you'd like to solve it yourself, head to the helmet on the right side of the room.

Use the photo you brought from home on the slot below the navigation controls, then activate the navigation. Put on your 3D glasses now! (Or don't)

The controls for the Navigation, the instructions for which are missing from the Steam version of the game:

Key	Useage
Tab	Switch between star map and your photo
Z	Pan left (moving your mouse works too)
X	Pan right (moving your mouse works too)
' (apostrophe)	Pan up (moving your mouse works too)
/ (slash)	Pan down (moving your mouse works too)
; (semi colon)	Pan forward
. (period)	Pan backward
Space	Stop moving
L	Lock a coordinate
D	Unlock a coordinate

To find your way back home, you need to match 3 stars from your photo with 3 stars in the star map. Star by clicking any star in your photo, and it will be highlighted with a red crosshair. Switch to the star map and the crosshair will remain. Somewhere in the star map, the appropriate star will be highlighted with a yellow diamond. Line up the crosshair with the diamond and hit L to lock the coordinate.

Repeat this process two more times (3 stars total) and press "Set Destination". Note that after the first coordinate lock, your freedom of movement in the star map is limited.

Exit from the navigation controls (you can take off your 3D glasses, unless you think they make you look cool) and head to the ship's wheel. Press the "Go" button, and watch the ending sequence and credits.</puzzlesolutions>

<officalguide>**STARSHIP TITANIC THE OFFICIAL STRATEGY GUIDE**
CONTENTS
- Description
- Foreword by A. Parrot
- Introduction by Douglas Adams
- How to Use This Book
- Getting Technical

CHAPTERS
- The Blerontin Bugle
- The PET
- The Bots
- Hints
- Solutions
- Index
- Plans of the Ship

Description
This is a walkthrough, hints, tips, and solutions book for the video game "Starship Titanic". There are puzzle by puzzle solutions to each of the games mysteries. It is written in as if a 'guide' were showing the player around the ship. The story is that of a person who's house was crashed into by the ship and then is taken onboard. Most of the computers, and bots on the ship have lost their memory and the players goal is to take control and eventually return home. Along the way the player can talk with the machines and must solve puzzles to find out things about each area that they visit. There are many gray-scale screenshots as well as original production wire-mess illustrations. Throughout the book there are side notes about certain areas from the makers of the game including Douglas Adams, who also wrote the 'Introduction' to this book, and developed the overall story line. Besides the guided walkthrough there is also a section on the 'Solutions' to the puzzles located throughout the game.

Foreword
What's going on here? I'm not writing a foreword! Im a parrot not a foreword writer!
I'm not some Ash-Throated Flycatcher you can get to write some bleeding foreword!
You want a foreword you go and ask a Band-Rumped Storm-Petrel!
You go and ask an
Atlantic Puffin. They'll knock off a foreword for you, an Atlantic Puffin will, for just half a
sardine. Give em a whole sardine and they'll bung you out a couple of prefaces and a
whole slew of appendices and a bloody bibliography! But not me, buster, if | can call you
buster, you've got the wrong avian!
I'm a parrot, you hear a parrot! | don't do this stuff! You go and consult any reputable
textbook on parrot behaviour and see where It says anything about the composition of
forewords for game manuals! It's not what we do! We have our pride! We're not like
those Black-Faced Grassquit Hacks! We're not a load of Hudsonian Godwit Literary
Sluts!
Alright, give us a nut and I'll do it.
A. Parrot

Introduction by Douglas Adams
I'm not allowed into the programmers room any more. We are about two days from
final delivery of the game. They are chasing down the very last of the bugs, making sure
that the cursors all point the right way, and that there are no hitherto unnoticed
glitches in the control interface. So my habit of wandering in and saying, Hey, here's a
great idea, why don't we put in a bit where...? is beginning to get to them. That and the
long nights they've all spent sleeping on couches or floors around the office, living off
coffee, cold pizza and crumbs of encouragement from people like me saying Do you
think the parrot might look better in green? They're
all brilliant heroes, | salute them,
and I'm not at all surprised they don't want to see me this week.
A lot of people have been saying to me, with worried, searching looks, How come
the CD-ROM is six months late? The answer is very simple. It's because its a bloody
CD-ROM, that's why. All CD-ROMs are six months late. At least. It's an immutable law
of the universe. The only surprising thing about ours being late is that we were surprised
by it. We had no idea  well, certainly | had no idea  of the scale of the enterprise we
were undertaking.
Probably the biggest task, certainly the biggest leap into the unknown, was handling
the language interaction. Nothing on this scale had ever been attempted in a computer
game before. In fact, everybody whose advice we sought said we couldn't do it and
would be mad to even attempt it.A good challenge. Clearly the task was beyond the
scope of any one person and we recruited a small team of dialogue writers to work
with me, including Neil Richards and Michael Bywater. Michael is an old friend who had
already worked with me sketching out the structure of the game. Neil knew little about
computers and was therefore easily fooled into taking on the task of managing and edit-
ing the dialogue, a job that dominated his life for the next year. It was huge.
We started very simply, sketching out some of the things that we imagined a play-
er might think of saying to the characters and what the characters should say in
response.
We brought in actors to record the lines, programmed them into the game
and tested it to see how it worked. It was pathetic. For every input line we had thought
of there were ninety-nine we hadn't. So we started on a second, much, much deeper
and longer set of scripts to cover what we had overlooked, and got the actors in again,
this time to record reams and reams of sentences, phrases, words, numbers, names,

burps, sneezes and names of chicken recipes. This all got coded into the game, and again
it wasn't remotely enough. The problem was increasing like a fractal, and was rendered
almost impossibly more complicated by the fact that | had recklessly decided early on
that each of the Bots would have a series of different moods and behaviours, each of
which had to be covered for any given situation. So for instance, the BarBot might be in
charming mood or a belligerent mood, might be telling the truth or lying, and might be
more or less able to come to the point quickly. Or any combination of any of the above.
This was a hideous, hideous problem. Especially for Neil who did most of the work on
the BarBot and became a haggard, hunted creature as we went through this write,
record, test, and rewrite iteration time after time over the course of a year.
We ended up with over sixteen hours of little snippets of dialogue. Over ten thou-
sand lines. YOU WILL NOT GET BORED TALKING TO THESE ROBOTS. Some people
who have tried the game have asked if this is an exercise in artificial intelligence. No. Not
even remotely. Just as when a stage magician saws his assistant in half and then joins her
together again it isn't an exercise in medical science. Its a trick, an illusion, albeit a
highly complex and sophisticated one. When you're playing Starship Titanic the com-
puter doesn't understand anything. It just assesses the players input according to a
simple set of rules and then chooses an appropriate output. Watch any Presidential
debate and you'll get the idea. Having gone this far though, it seems a pity that we did-
n't just go all out for trying to achieve artificial intelligence while we were about it. Hell,
there's a good couple of days before we finally freeze the code, maybe I'l just pop along
to the programmers room and see if they're up for it.
Gog.
at

How to Use This Book
There's nothing worse than opening a Strategy Guide at the wrong page and finding the
solution to a puzzle that hasn t even begun to puzzle you yet.
So how do you avoid that happening here? For a start, DON'T READ the chapter
called SOLUTIONS unless you're hopelessly, incurably, irrevocably STUCK. Because the
SOLUTIONS chapter doesnt muck about. Oh no. You want solutions  that's what you
get. There's no wishy-washy Try this or "Try that: just plain Do this, click on that, drag
it over and now get on with the next one..:
If you have to use the SOLUTIONS chapter then you should use the mini-index
on page 107. That way you won t stumble across the solution to another puzzle by
mistake.
The HINTS chapter on the other hand is essentially a walk-through of the game. You'll
get suggestions, possible dialogue routes, descriptions of the important objects in the
rooms (just in case you miss something) and, of course, hints...
The chapter called THE BUGLE gives you back-story and clues about the Starship
Titanic, her crew and creators, all of which might help you solve the mysteries of the
ship. Then again it might not.

(letting Technica
Starship Titanic is big. Really big. You might think Microsoft Encarta is big, but thats
peanuts compared to Starship Titanic. It comes on more than one CD-ROM, for a start.
The more intelligent readers will have noticed that | didn't say exactly how many CDs
it comes on. The less intelligent readers will have stopped reading by now because their
lips are tired.
| did not mention how many CDs there are, because I'm not entirely sure yet. This
is because | am writing this before Starship Titanic has been completely finished. So |
could tell you a number, but that number might go down or up, depending on how well
I've budgeted for our cleverness or stupidity. For now, just assume we're really clever: It
saves a whole bunch of time. In fact, due to the ridiculous lead times publishers need,
this is being written before Starship Titanic has even been started. Honestly  my
current job is working as a Windows applications programmer  | haven't even joined
The Digital Village, nor have | even heard of it yet. The first episode of the Hitchhiker
radio series has just been broadcast for the first time. This enormous lead time is
required by publishers, because when | e-mail this copy to Neil, he will then e-mail it to
the publishers, who will print it out on a daisy- wheel printer, and give it to their copy
boy, Jebediah, who will then run down the Oxford Road until he gets to the print-
ing press. Well, | say printing press. Two guys in a field with some rocks and chisels, if you
want the facts.
But | digress. It's something | do. As my silver-haired old grandmother used to say,
Get to the point before | shoot you like a dog in the street. And she always told me
Goldie went to stay on someone's farm. Ha. The main symptom of Starship Titanic com-
ing on more than one CD is that you will, as the player of this spectacular game, be
prompted to change CDs periodically. When you insert a CD, spare a thought for us,
the technical team, who worked hard to make sure this happens as little as possible
while you play the game. It was a non-stop workarama  at one stage, Sean even typed
in some
source
code. Rik and Adam
frequently interrupted
their top-level
Carmageddon briefings to bring this elegant game to you. On many occasions Emma
Code Spice" Westecott would stop scaring the life out of the artists and click a few
mouse buttons. Hell, some days | even came into work before eleven-thirty.
So you know how we struggled to ease your pain. If we save you some inconve-
nience as a result, it makes our day. Of course, you might say that the frequent articles

in magazines and newspapers complaining about the failure of geeks and nerds to
make computers easier to use for''normal people would be reward enough. But some-
how, uninformed bigots are just not enough for us  we need to make life easier for
you, the real people. The people with tired lips. So we have. Trust me  Im not a real
programmer (Don't worry  it's another joke for the geeks.)
Oh yes. The technical stuff. Assuming you have opposable thumbs, here are some
tips for handling those pesky CD-ROMs:
Put them in with the printing on the uppermost surface  they work better like that.
Take them out of the case first. (Trust me, this has an even bigger effect than the whole
right-way-up thing.)
Do not, as | was gravely warned by the instructions of a game | bought recently, put CDs
into your drive that have been mended with glue. Important safety tip, guys.
Tim Browse
Technical Lead
Starship Titanic Project
March 1998

THE
BLERONTIN
BUGLE
TITANIC TRAGEDY SPECIAL EDITION
Last confirmed sighting
of Starship Titanic

Wal
ae [eben anne chee aneeee ei
THE BLERONTIN BUGLE  TITANIC TRAGEDY SPECIAL EDITION
ON OTHER PAGES
ANANAN
We will be Blamed
warns the Yeller. Yassaccans fear
reprisals.
LNIANAN
SMEF -
Spontaneous Massive Existence
Failure. Have we gone too far?
asks our Hair and Beauty
Correspondent.
ANANA-%_
Nib matches may be
postponed. Blerontin Girls
stranded in Vastan. Execution of
Vastan Chiefs of Staff just a
precaution says team coach Clem
Grunt.
ANANA\ Full two-page recipe
for Leovinuss Award-Winning
Canape.
AN4NAS Fortillian OPerfluous
(whose personality was on board)
mixes a Commemorative Cocktail
and talks about the tragedy.
ANA NAN We knew it would end
in tears  The Wives of The
Missing speak out from their
Secret Mountain Hideaway.
ANANAN
InterGalactic Travel
still safer than eating mints says
Leader of Blerontin Tourist
Fraternity.
LWNANAN_
The Gat of
Blerontis promises: Something will
be done. By someone. Somewhere.
ANANA\
Hernandez
Terpsicoid on that famous pink
sheeting: Forget the Titanic  that
was the real disaster!
ALso: Nasal Hair  is it making a
Comeback?
LEOVINUS FEARED
PERISHED.
a
The
loss
of
Leovinus,
feared
perished on the ill-fated Titanic,
has cast a shadow not just across
Blerontin but deep into the known
Galaxy. This extraordinary man, at
ease both with pastry-cutter and
cybo-dynamic lance, has blazed a
trail of invention across our lives for
many decades.
Leovinus was destined for great-
ness. His father was the legendary
soprazzo Zoltan B. Link (later to
become the Astronomer Laureate),
his mother
the renowned
Hat
Designer Xorastes Taul. Leovinuss
birth, in a cave high in the moun-
tain ranges of Talabok during the
Eleventh Revolutionary War, is the
stuff of legend. Both his parents
were soldiers in the 8th Operatic
Commando during the Ten Year
Siege of Kalaboosh, and Leovinus
was to spend his formative years at
their side. At the age of 4 he had
twice been decorated for valour: his
invention, at the age of 8, of the
Seamless Bomb Lobber, turned the
tide of the war. When the victorious
armies entered Blerontis Leovinus
was placed at their helm to receive
the Citys surrender.
Brilliant in war, the young Leovinus
was soon to shine in peace. Enrolled
as
a Platinum Member of the
Blerontis Academy of Very Difficult
Things he soon took degrees in
astrophysics,
molecular
biology,
geophysics,
painting,
sculpture,
mechanical design, physics, anato-
my, music, poetry, crystallography,
thermodynamics, weaponry,
elec-
tromagnetism
and __ philosophy.
Unbeknownst to his fellow students
he also taught himself
canape
arrangement

his breathtaking
debut at the All-Blerontis Singles in
43 and his dazzling victory in the
Finals in straight trays led immedi-
ately to a place in the National team
and the first of many Limpiad Gold
Medals. His similar domination of
the Hopping Competition was to
lead to the accumulation of ten
Land Speed Records in all.
The years immediately following
his graduation were to be disap-
pointing
ones
however.
In_ his
autobiography An Ordinary Life Lived
Not Once But Twiceover is The Same As
A Single Life Lived Quite Slowly he
Dr Slender Ceisurewear
This booklet will tell
you something
about underwear
which you
never knew | ,
before.
F
It will tell you how to be free from
colds, how to be thoroughly
protected, how to enjoy genuine
bodily cleanliness and also how to
obtain such comfort as is utterly
unknown to wearers of ordinary
undergarments.
Forget Snork hair.
Revolutionary Pant & Pouch
Liners (modelled on Dr
Slenders own hands) delicately
support, protect  and clean at
the same time using the latest
oil-free Lingering Technology.
Personal callers welcome.
83, Large Mall (Hotel Gat front)

THE BLERONTIN BUGLE  TITANIC TRAGEDY SPECIAL EDITION
draws a veil over some of the dark-
er events. Certainly he lost his way
 there are rumours of experiments
with hot gasses and yodelling. He
was
twice arrested
for carrying
flowers. His involvement with the
Revolutionary
Shoe
cannot
be
denied.
Finally, on advice from
the Gat himself, Leovinuss parents
sent
him
to
the
Architectural
Monastery of Reborzo for a period
of reflection.
There
the
great
Monsignor Zoot Bilgewater took
him under his wing and showed
him  Architecture.
What schoolboy now cannot recite
the list of Towering Achievements
which were
to stem from that
inspired journey to Reborzo: the
great North-South Bridge that links
our two polar caps; the Pandax
Building with its inter-changeable
rooms; the Collapsible Galaxy; the
Disposable Shopping Planets; the
astonishing Twirly Wirly City with
its single concentric road; our Third
Sun that now shines above us with
its famous On-Off Switch.
Leovinus
was
truly prodigious,
never
tiring
of new
projects,
always challenging, forever winning
awards. The list of his inventions
is staggering: Long-Distance Hair
Removal; Cars; the Ionic Hedge-
Trimmer; the Cyber-Optic Trouser
Press;
BrainFarming;
Re-usable
Electricity; the Reversible Sausage;
de-aging Cream. The list is endless.
The
last
and
most
incredible
invention of the great Leovinuss
genius however was the propulsion
system for the Starship Titanic 
the vastest source of power in the
probable universe  a captive Black
Hole. Using the tried and tested
Higgs Shell this should have been
his greatest triumph, his final gift to
a grateful Blerontis. We shall never
know quite why  or indeed if  it
failed. Quite probably only a mind
such as Leovinus could tell us. And
in truth, there shall never be such a
mind again.
BLERONTIN STOCK
EXCHANGE.
_@___
DULL ON THE LOSS OF
THE TITANIC
The Stock Market has today been
quieter than for some
little time,
partly no doubt owing to the gloom
cast over the business world by the
Titanic Disaster. The tendency has
been reactionary and the majority
of the active stocks show losses on
the day.
The chief among these are: Higgs
Engineering three and one eighth,
Galactic Centrals and Star Trust
Common
one and one quarter,
Yassacan
Polish
two,
Vastan
Preferreds one and seven eighths,
SnorkBarrels seven eighths.
StarStruct Inc and Starlight Travel
withdrawn from trading.
On the Ancillary Comestibles and
Unscheduled Assets Market, Fish
Paste was unchanged. Lard was
badly hit. Frog Importations have
been suspended.
SOME NOTABLE
VICTIMS.
MR. A. G. BROBOSTIGON.
Antar Galoot Brobostigon whose
redoubtable managerial career has
been abruptly closed by the loss of
the Titanic was a stalwart of the
Blerontinian
commercial
world. |.
STARLIGHT TRAVEL
CONGRATULATES EVERYONE CONCERNED
ON THE SUCCESSFUL LAUNCH OF THE
STARSHIP TITANIC!
NOW BOOKING FOR THE TITANIC:
Anastomosa Riviera  pink sea!
Mountain Climbing in Sulgactyl  good views!
The Pride of Wappenshutz  old history!
Sprod  Sultry Nights!
Haagqa bin j Jabbli  odd cultures!
STARSHIP TITANIC.
THE SHIP THAT CANNOT POSSIBLY GO WRONG.

[ASE MARRS EE Pecan ee
Nn IDAHO haha remanent
THE BLERONTIN BUGLE  TITANIC TRAGEDY SPECIAL EDITION
[BN ces RE cee Ana baer es LATEST
Res
Born the twenty-ninth son of the
heretical Bishop of Ab, Antar was
brought up in his fathers absence
by his uncle, a chicken-farmer who
sadly perished
in
a_ husbandry
accident when Antar was
only
eight. Antar inherited the farm and
his commercial instincts were soon
in evidence: at the age of fourteen
he created the first Lend-Lease
Poultry Droppings Franchise. The
sale of this five years later financed
his passage through
the Santa
Quaraltima School of Usury and
Small Book-Keeping. Quazzers
was the making of Brobostigon: he
graduated Top Chap of his year
and was made Student With Very
Big Hat. After a years Hardening,
he joined InterGal as a junior man-
ager
in the
prestigious
Lethal
Injections Department.
Fate was now to play its well-man-
icured
hand
in
Brobostigons
career: the Great War Of Vastan
helped him to triple turnover with-
out risking capital and he soon
earned himself a reputation as a
safe pair of hands. Not that he
was
without
a
certain
impish
humour: as the Conflict neared its
end
Brobostigon
caused
much
hilarity amongst his colleagues with
a
nightly
Cloud-Light
Display
showing InterGals profits comic-
ally sparring with the latest casualty
figures.
When InterGal decided to set up
its Very Nasty Weapons Division,
Antar was chosen to head it. He
was in his element and over the
next few years earned the fear and
respect of all his employees. Never
one to be chained to a desk, he
would often be seen down in the
testing beds in shirtsleeves and robe
firing off experimental rounds at
the prisoner volunteers from the
nearby divorce courts. It was there
that he met and fell in love with
his wife-to-be Crossa. Their lavish
honeymoon in the Field Wounds
Centre on Izioma was the envy of
many.
On
their
return
Crossa
worked alongside Antar for many
years as he moved up the ranks at
InterGal,
initially with the Very
Small and Still Quite Noisy Ships
Division before finally accepting the
challenge of The Department of
Extremely Grand Liners.
Sadly, a disastrous accident whilst
Antar and Crossa were away on
vacation
led to the closure
of
InterGals_
entire
shipbuilding
facilities and Antar was forced to
retire briefly from employment.
Always reluctant to talk of this
episode in his life he would briskly
remind the casual observer that he
had been completely exonerated in
the ensuing public enquiry.
After devoting the next five years
to the construction of his own
impressive
20 bedroom
ocean-
facing villa, Antar returned to the
ship-building industry with
the
ill-fated
position
of
project
manager on the Titanic. It is a trib-
ute to his skills that there have been
only two hundred fatalities under
his stewardship,
and
less than
fifty of these have been accidental.
His loss will be deeply felt not
just in the weapons and shipping
industries but also by the Santa
Quaraltima
Boy
Choristers
Association of which he was an
enthusiastic supporter.
Mr _ Brobostigon
is
survived
by his
wife
Crossa
and
one
Hermaphrodite, Lorn.
MR. D. SCRALIONTIS.
Droot
Scraliontis
came
from
a
long line of Accountants.
Born
is
unusually on Chitterling Day he
benefited throughout his life from
the extra tax concessions offered by
the Chitterling Foundation
and
accepted their offer of a scholarship
to Coin College. Having entered
the
service
of
the
Penitential
Assurance Co in 58 he rapidly rose
to a position of prominence. The
highest of all actuarial honours was
bestowed upon him in 74 viz the
election to the Presidential Chair
for the customary term of two
years. He went into private practice
in 77. An avid collector of sand, he
was a founder member of the Sand
Society and lectured throughout
the galaxy.
Mr Scraliontis is survived by his
wife Wyde. He had three Worbs,
which will be put down.
HEALTH RESTORED WITHOUT
MEDICINE OR EXPENSE
Send now for the
CYBERNETIC VIRUS
HUNTER -
The Chip with the Whip!
Painless. I recommend it.
R. Sneb, County Lork
My family dont recognise me.
Mrs P. Andalax
As used by Captains and farmers
everywhere. Send 20 horrints
and a small bag (one eighth or
under) to:
Flesh Research,
Thrib Industries, Lork.
Please state whether bowel or
bladder.

SS.
Eo
AR
Shs
i
ee
(AMG
IME FET
The PET Is your interface with the Starship Titanic.
lt can be used in many different ways on board the ship:
to talk to the Bots, to call a lift, to turn on a TV or even to
re-arrange the furniture.
It has five distinct modes:
Chat-O-Mat; Personal Baggage; Remote Thingummy;
Designer Room Numbers; and Real Life.
The PET comes in three different shiny finishes depending
upon what class you are. On the Starship Titanic of course.

Each mode is represented by an icon on the right hand
side. Click on the appropriate icon with the cursor to
select a mode or to change modes. Whichever mode
you are in  the relevant icon is highlighted.
In some
situations the PET mode will change automatically
when there has been an important game event:
for
example, if you are upgraded it will change from Chat-
O-Mat to Designer Room Number mode to show you
your new room number, even though you are talking
to the DeskBot.
Chat-O-Mat
eset
900
eR
Bt
Gee
hee pete ee eee eld
et emma ee eee mals Be leet)
ee
et
ee Se Umeda
Sa
aes
ARASH
et EES AN
ee
el
Use this mode to talk to the Bots. The box on the left hand side of the PET shows which Bot you are
currently talking to. You can summon Bots in most rooms: the boxes on the right hand side show which
Bots are available. To summon a Bot click on its image. To review a conversation, use the scroll arrows.
Personal Baggage
This is a kind of inventory. It shows you what game objects you have already picked up. If you come
across an object that you want to put in your PET, simply click on it and drag it into an empty box. (In
fact your PET will even accept objects if you're not in Personal Baggage mode.) You can also drag items
out of the PET  to put them in the Succ-U-Bus tray or give to a Bot, for example.
As your Personal
Baggage fills up you may find it necessary to scroll using the arrows to reveal new empty boxes.

Remote Thingummy
sectrasternsenanmcesetenretremeretenay
Mee Waa
ae
Succ-U-Bus
Use this mode to control various objects on board the ship (the Elevator, Pellerator,
TV, Succ-U-Bus, for
example). Whenever there is a controllable object in a room it will always appear in one of the boxes of
Remote Thingummy mode. Just select the icon of the item you wish to control and the appropriate
buttons will appear on the right hand side of the PET.

Most of the objects which you control in Remote Thingummy mode are simple to operate. The Starfield
is more complex, however:
Ft)
Navigate-O-Ship
Starfield Operation
Designer Room Numbers
rey ey ueelieue ee) ce (ele aS) oie esl ee
ae isle)
"=" Desigse Room Numbers
Every room on the ST has a unique chevron identifier which you will see on walls etc. The PET always
displays in the right hand box the chevron representing the room in which you are currently standing.
You can create a library of rooms you have visited: to do this, each time you enter a room, drag the icon
from the right-hand box into an empty box. These chevrons can be used to tell the Succ-U-Bus the
destination for any object you are sending: simply drag the chevron onto the activated Succ-U-Bus then
go to Remote Thingummy mode.and tell him what to do. To copy a chevron or create a new one, you
can edit the chevron in the right-hand box using your cursor with the SHIFT key depressed.

Real Life
Use this mode when you want to return to Reality.
Save
Click on this to save up to six different games. Games can be numbered or named according to your
preference.
CNR NONE SEREAEREHEEI AA
N
NN S
A NELE LE LEE AETE INS
Click on this to reveal your saved games. Just click to select then press return or hit the load button.
Volume
Master. Volume... \y
Music Volume
Parrot Volume
Speech Volume
HrXKE
EN ee er
ee
Click on this to set the volume levels of the game. The different controls affect general volume, character
volume, room volume etc.
,

aaa

Sy
T
vA > R-
6S)
AAI
Pe
TITANIC
\
In the Titanic universe, donating your personality
(i.e. getting your brain scanned for use in a robot) is like
being a blood-donor in America  something you do for a
bit of cash. The better your personality the more money
you get for it. What happens to a mind that has been
scanned and stored in software?
It has to work its way up
the ranks. All the minds on Starship Titanic are now in
pretty prestigious jobs but they've had to work their way
up through being the onboard intelligences in toasters,
speak-your-weight machines, on-screen help, VCRs, etc.
Douglas Adams
:
@)

IDENTIFICATION CARD &
SERVICE RECORD
Issued by The Blerontin Council of Transport & Ethics
_ | Name:
| Edmund Lucy Fentible
SpE
| Witherskip Humbler
=
registered to: Star-Strud Inc
:
>
]

We take pride in our Bots...Should you be disappointed in any way with this Bot's=
appearance or behaviour do not hesitate. Feel disappointed.

Ahoy from deep space! You always
said youd get me up here one day - well
three cheers tor personality transfers.
So far all gone swimmingly although
departure from Blerontin trifle swift for my
tastes. Ship not quite as ship-shape as
had been led to expect. Behaviour of some
of crew leaves much to be desired. All
going to end in tears.

Larry's
Novelly
Cards,
Small
Mail
Blerontis
Funny. Cant seem to remember who
you are anymore.
Wheres the sense in it all...

| IDENTIFICATION CARD &
| SERVICE RECORD
Issued by-The Blerontin Council of Transport & Ethics
oe
ee
ndefatigable (auto)
Comments:
[
Maintenance:
[Discretion
Repuetorreinsaled
HG1530%89
Lig-Buster 1.8 loaded. |ps 66.3.0989
| Put-Em-Down 2 loaded. Jps 67.3. 0989
Upgrade-Ratifier checked. Jps 69.3.0989
Bell shined. Norb. 70/3/098
Lv
registered to: SHarStud Inc
We take pride in our Bots...should you be. disappointed in any way with this Bot's
appearance or behaviour do not, hesitate, Feel disappointed.

= ETHERCARTE ===
Pu
. )
>...... | will not be moved on the black-
. .
. .
share issue and it is unfair of you to use
Bi )
|. grandfather's will to try and persuade me.
|
(You conveniently forget clause 23a which
| )
|
effectively anticipates and negates the
.
course of action you seem determined to
follow.) If you persist in this matter | shall
have no alternative but to bring it to a
i
vote at the next family meeting.
.
> ......Glve my love to Hettie.

Larry's
Novelty
Cards,
Smalt
Mail
Blerantis
I
a ee
Eg
a
SDL
SETI
NSBNGPNORSENE
SRE
IE
EN
ane SRT
CHOC
NAME RCSA
SSO
SNOPES
oe
The voyage is proving uneventtul. Do
not forget to water the philospanglias by the
boat house. If any Worbs are leaving
droppings there, have them destroyed.
Stan In haste,
Spee Marsinta.
<END>

IDENTIFICATION CARO &
SERVICE RECORD.
Issued by The Blerontin Council. of
Transport & Ethics
Comments:
| Nav.  Most pee
_ Maintenance:
Corrupted Assistance Drive replaced. ps |02.3.0989
Thru-Pass upgraded. Jps |02.3.0989
Default humour settings checked. Hg, 66.3.0989
New bulb fitted. Ken Natwakket. 70/3/0989
registered to: SarStruc Inc
We take pride in our Bots..Should you be disappointed in any way with this Bot's
appearance or behaviour do not hesitate, Feel disappointed.

ETHER CART E>
>... Whew what a trip!
>... Hal Just kidding. Slept through take-
>... Two hours after take-off we got hit
off. Looking forward to payday.
- ina big way by a fleet of Yassacan barge-
busters. Took a lot of collateral but yours
truly seized command and after a fire-fight
that makes the siege of Vastan look like a
fish-paste convention we triumphed and
if It's Heading For The Beach Il Ride It

Larry's
Novelty
Cards,
Smali
Mail
Blerontis
brought peace again to this troubled
<END>
corner of the galaxy.

IDENTIFICATION CARD &
SERVICE RECORD
Issued by The Blerontin Council. of Transport & Ethics
sashes
Nita
ties
'
|
Maintenance:_ hae Pir Wy
registered to: Star Struct Inc.
We take pride in our Bots..Should you be disappointed:in any way with this Bot's
appearance or behaviour do nat hesitate. Feel disappointed.

i
Bill ll
|
i} |
Sena
ee, Major-General Lithium Hatravers,
|
hed Mum's the word for now but line
|
i
Master of the Golden Gourd.
|
em up for me at the Legion bar and
i
=
well read the entrails together when I'm
+
Util
7
:
e)
| |
) |
>... Well its a rum do and no mistake.
5
back in Blaggerty eh?
: .
i}.
IF this reaches you Il have been through
3]
Bi
ck
me
a
.
i]
something nigh on diabolical and come out = |
>...... Nobbie.
) .
i
the other side. If it doesn't then I'l have
E
ii
>)
|
i
caught one gift-wrapped as Archyusedto
3
<END>
i
iil
2
i |
i |
> sane With my lungs it didn't ought tobe = |
4
iti
;
;
t
1
me what's got to work this out, but II tell
|
.
|
|
you now there's been some Jjiggery pokery
i
iil
on board this boat and no mistake.
if}
;
|
iW)
.

IDENTIFICATION CARD &
SERVICE RECORD
Issued by The Blerontin Council of Transport & Ethics
|
VE7XBER 000, 2299
Maintenance:
Charm re-balanced, Exaggerator uninstalled. Jps |4.3.0989
Digression Engine sympathised. Jps 66.3.0989
| New Nib Directory loaded. Jps 67.3.0989
Honesty settings re-configured. Jps 69.3.0989
Oiled and gutted. Jokes changed. K. Natwakket. 70/3/0989
registered to: StarStruct Inc
We take pride in our Bots,..Should you be disappointed in any way with this Bot's
appearance or behaviour do not. hesitate. Feel disappointed.

>... You tell Rafferty Ill be home
soon to take up his offer. Forget that
tip he calls a bar - youll be drinking in
Bantoburn's from now on and it won't
just be pints of Slug, oh no, Ive learnt
a thing or two on this trip.
> wa. My god but Raffertys a mean
squint-eyed fish of a fellow now | think
of him.

Larry's
Novelty
Cards,
Smalf
Mail
Blerontis
>... Funny - lve been having some rare
ald mood swings since we left
Blerontin...but what the hell.
> ...... To the greater glory of gullets
everywherell!
Seat Fortillian.

IDENTIFICATION CARD &
SEHVIGERECORD
[
DAstragar (DAstragaaar) DAstragar_|
cate
| |
LKHF 354 0298
Comments:
|
Nav. restriction  First Class Restaurant
registered to: Star-Strud Inc
We take pride in our Bots.. Should you be disappointed in any way with this Bot's
appearance or behaviour do not hesitate. Feel disappointed.

ETHERCARTE
|
>... Members of the Academy
>...... | report to you what | have seen
already. Certainly the kitchens are
_
unimpeachable. | have no qualms and
there is required security around the frog
enclosures.
> wu... As feared however, my station has
been positioned in the low-visibility areas
in COMPLETE contradiction of the
agreement reached at the Interim
Comestibles Committee. This big flouting
|
|
sa
amo
ER

Larrys
Noveily
Cards,
Smaif
Mail
Blerontis
oR
PEER ESS
@
en
seyncesincinonstonuamserestnblinneritanpessonenbsinmnesitornioagnanesnoyn
smonncnnsrerenercrrusannuaieetitennsgetauryenynlasansiissin
can only benefit the wine waiters, and | have
if need
be, | am prepared for a fight and |
tell you |
will fight.
> vn. With continued regard for your support,
some small horror at the outcome.
Sree! | remain,
> wu. D/Astragaaar.
<END>

ey
| IDENTIFICATION CARO &
SERVICE RECORD
Issued by The Blerontin Council of Transport & Ethics
Name:
ERE
LT
LOE
Ee
TR
| Shorbert Sweet
ee
ees
( Reg. no:
| GT55SR 0 9585
| No. of former keepers: |
Ne 7
ihe
ee ooo
8987787
fe
oe
2
[oxoumer?
[Comments
| Nav. restriction  All Areas
Maintenance:
Fowling tubes re-grouted, Don Lout 14.3.0989
registered to: SarStruct Inc
We take pride in our Bots. Should you be disappointed in any way with this Bot's
appearance or behaviour do not hesitate, Feel disappointed.

imo
a aN ROT
SNUDIO FRAY HEWES SPUR AYNOAON SANE] 
life this.
bring you back some
Sno
alt
iil
.. Dear Fleb
.. Shorbert
1 TanecnsumamcamnsaneesoncunemarmsmaatiennissunnincamneiininncntniealtiimneRSensSt er RENT
Rn eaAnettsanGtnetisheeeeiNstnenteene
-ssoreeenttnsen
tte
tmnetteeetttneneeccrceneesemereemementctsaceestens
esteem ne cremstemmnest eset eet
metas


I'm a Parrot.
Anybody tells you Im a Macaw, spit at them!
Im a Parrot!

You think I'm some kind of Barnacle Goose?
Boreal Chickadee? Common Eider?
Some kind of Eastern Screech Owl you can prod?
You think I'm some kind of Bay-Breasted Warbler?
Black-Bellied Whistling Duck?
Blossom-Headed Parakeet?
Some kind of Bohemian Waxwing to make free with?
You think Im some kind of Curve-Billed Thrasher?
Common Yellow-Throat? Clarks Nutcracker?
Chestnut-Backed Chickadee?
Purple Gallinule? Red-Breasted Sapsucker?
Rough-Legged Hawk?
Pygmy Nuthatch? Piping Plover?
Well Im not!
Im a Parrot!
A self-respecting Parrot! Treat me with the respect my position in the
catalogue of ornithology betokens!
Squawk! Squawk!
| didnt say anything about being a sane Parrot, did |?

It's a curious thing about this kind of fantastical computer
game: there is both a logic and a great illogic about it. It's an
Alice in Wonderland world, where everything makes sense
seen from within one frame of reference, but from any
other frame of reference is completely insane. It's not
because we were determined to be logically illogical or
illogically logical but, in the construction of something on
this scale there come to be all kinds of little logical worlds
that dont necessarily properly fit together  perhaps It
doesn't entirely make sense but it's fun so we dont mind!
Douglas Adams

(letting Started
Starship Titanic isn't a linear game. There are an infinite number of paths through it and
most of the puzzles don't have to be solved in a particular order. This chapter is essen-
tially a guided tour The route I've chosen is one of the more direct but as you become
familiar with the ship you'll discover faster ones.
Inevitably some of the puzzles will be revealed in the following pages, but | hope in
such a way that you'll still get the chance to figure most of them out for yourself The
puzzles often interconnect: many of the game objects are used more than once but in
different ways according to the particular puzzle you are trying to solve.
A few simple rules will speed up your progress.
Firstly, don't forget to read the First Class Inflight Magazine which should have come
in your game box  tt contains many useful leads. It also contains red herrings  but what
do you expect from a game like this?
Follow your primeval upgrade instincts wherever possible. Much of the Starship
Titanic is off-limits to 3rd Class Passengers (SGT Class) and you won't solve anything if
you can't get into the key rooms.
As you wander around the ship, click on-everything  you never know where a use-
ful game object may be hidden in a room.
And finally, dont forget to talk to the Bots  they may often behave irrationally but
it's not their fault. They're malfunctioning. Most of the time they want to help...
So, let's get started. I'll assume you've loaded the game, and you are now relaxing in
the sitting room of Your Lovely Home. This
is a good place to acquaint yourself with
The opening scene of the game has always _ the navigation techniques which you will
been known by the team as "Your Lovely
need to move around the Starship Titanic.
Home because that is what | jotted down in
It's all standard stuff  those of you who
the script. lt wasnt meant to be a formal title,
play games night and day and no longer
it was just a moment of irony after my first
have a life will just have to bear with me
early morning cup of coffee and you know you  here while | explain. Using your mouse,
always like to be a
little bit ironic at that
move the cursor round the screen. The
point. So | put Your Lovely Home in. ! think it
cursor
will change shape or direction
was after somebody had been talking to me
whenever it lands on an area that gives
about Hello! Magazine. *
you an option of movement.
Just left-click
Douclas ADAMS
and you will move (nav) in the direction
your cursor is pointing  this can also be

Your Lovely Home
up or down. In some cases the cursor will turn into a hand  this indicates there is an
object in the vicinity you can grab. Occasionally the cursor turns into a magnifying glass
or highlights  this indicates there is either a hidden object or something you can acti-
vate. If you want to speed up your movement at any time, simply hold down the shift
key as you click  this will cut out the movies which play in between each different view.
Back to Your Lovely Home. This of course is just like your own Lovely Home  but
cleaner. Wander round the room, look at the pictures, turn on the TV. You'll find this
terribly realistic: repeats on every channel.
When you are ready to start the game
proper, go to the computer. Click on the
CD tray  it will slide out. Grab one of the
blank CDs from the table and drop it
onto the tray. The CD will run but an
error message will appear Click on the
tray, take out the CD and try the other
blank. Same problem.
Daytime Television

Lert: The DoorBot arrives
RIGHT: The journey begins
You didn't actually have to do that, but a lot of effort went into creating those CDs
and it would be a shame if nobody ever played them. Now take the CD with the
Starship Titanic logo and drag it onto the tray.
What you're now hearing is the sound of an Intergalactic Liner taking a chunk out of
your home insurance policy. This is the Starship Titanic, the Ship That Cannot Possibly Go
Wrong, veering out of Hyperspace and into your roof. When the dust has settled a
hatch opens and a figure emerges. This is a DoorBot. In fact as there is only one DoorBot
on board you ought to know him as the DoorBot. His name is Fentible  a gentle soul
whose role in normal times would be to welcome guests aboard, answer queries, be
civil and of course open doors. At the moment he's down here checking what damage
Your PET

Your Lovely Home
has done
to the
Starship Titanic. He's
also about to make
you an offer that you
cannot
refuse:
a
chance-of-a-lifetime
free trip on board
the ship.
This opening sec-
tion of the game is
directed:
all you
have to do |s type
YES when Fentible
tells you to and lis-
ten carefully to what
he says. Before you
go on board he will
give you a PET  a
Personal Electronic Thing  which from now until the end of the game will sit at the bot-
tom of your screen.(For details about the PET see page 18.) Fentible will also insist you
collect the Picture of the Night Sky from the cupboard on the right. If you don't drag it
into your PET he will show you how it's done. As soon as you've agreed to help, Fentible
will lead you into the Service Elevator and the steps will close up behind you. Clearly
he is not a well Bot  you will have to help him out when he asks you to press the but-
tons. This memory lapse in the DoorBot is an early clue to the poor fellows problems.
By the way  did you notice that there are three buttons! Remember that  you may
need to use this Elevator again.
As the Service Elevator takes you up the side of the ship, you will get a sense of the
scale of the Starship Titanic from the view through the window. In
the meantime, listen carefully as Fentible explains what's wrong
with the ship and what you are going to do to fix tt...
After a short while the Service Elevator comes to a halt and you
are steered into a large, moonlit room. This is the Embarkation
Lobby, a key room on board the Starship Titanic. Fentible disap-
pears to secure the ship for take-off and you are now on your own.
You can wander round if you like but you'll soon find you can't do
much  all the room exits are sealed. Try the bell on the desk _A sleeping DeskBot

The Plinth
you might get a muffled
voice but that's all. Time
to
do what
Fentible
asked  find the plinth
and click on the button...
While the Hugely Ex-
pensive Opening Cred-
its are rolling, take this
opportunity to view the
external
shape of the
ship. Essentially
its a
giant
T. So far you've only
travelled up the outside of the spine of the T so you can see how much more of the Starship
Titanic there is to explore.
The Embarkation Lobby

When you finally arrive in The Embarkation
Lobby | wanted the sense that it really is
very splendid and utterly different from
anything one would expect to find in a
_ spaceship. Look at the environments we
create in ocean-going ships: why couldn't there
be something even more grand than that on
spaceships? If this thing actually is a liner  a
hotel  then it's got to look like one rather
than like a spaceship. %
DoucLas ADAMS
When the credits are complete you
are returned to the Embarkation Lobby
which is now properly lit and functioning.
Go over to the desk and try clicking on
the bell again. After a second it will open
up and another Bot is revealed: the
DeskBot. This Check-In-Clerk From Hell
goes by the name of Marsinta Drewbish.
Be warned: her routine is not for the faint-
hearted. Answer the questions carefully.
Try to be funny and the DeskBot has
been programmed to ignore you. Just let
her call the shots and stick to the point.
You'll notice that you're guest number
one. This could be a clue that something odd has been going on. Or it may just be that
no-one has managed to get past Marsinta yet. Don't be put off though  shes not like
this all the time. If you wait long enough you're bound to encounter her in a better
mood.
The DeskBot
Perhaps this is a good moment to explain how the Bots function on the Starship
Titanic. As all Bots start life as Genuine People Personalities" they come equipped with
characteristics both good and bad. Special cellpoints allow their owners to customise

Design Room Number
them according to individual tastes. Helpful dials are included on the PET to indicate if
a Bot has moved away from its recommended cellpoint settings. In theory, it's a won-
derful theory. Just so long as nothing goes wrong with the central intelligence which con-
trols them. As soon as that happens Bots exhibit random behaviour which may not be
pleasant to observe and which is normally suppressed. They also become decidedly
unhelpful. It is possible to fix them but that is not the kind of information you are likely
to find in a chapter called Hints.
Back to Marsinta. When she's ready she'll allocate you a room and your PET will ping
into Designer Room Numbers mode. The coloured chevron in the Box in your PET ts
known as  a chevron. Logical really, It's a graphical representation of your room address.
All rooms on board the Starship Titanic have one. When the check-in is over, Marsinta
calls the BellBot then folds back into her desk, leaving you on your own. Not for long
Krage Koyotoaal  your
BellBot
_
stake me to your leader
i Bots cant go to the E
0 good at walking
up!

Years ago | visited the Queen Mary on
Long Beach, California. It is so beautiful and
has such incredible, exquisite workmanship,
very different from the slight air of Holiday Inn
you get on QE2. That lodged in my mind as
being a wonderfully different starting point for
a starship. All starships, when it comes down
- to it, are really variations on the Starship
Enterprise: lots of moulded plastic surfaces
_ which you really wouldn't want to live in day
by day. You watch Star Trek (and this is
_ absolutely no disrespect to Star Trek
per) and you think how can those
people live in that environment?
i All those sculptured plastic surfaces and
f ~
skin tight clothes. It would drive you crazy
Q es
after a while.
ee
DoucLas ADAMS -
ASE
Ne
however. An animated lamp lurches into
view. Designed to blend into any elegant
background this is the BellBot  Krage
Koyotaal lV. Krage is supremely unqualified
to be a BellBot. Really he'd much rather
be on a beach drinking a cold beer. Krage
is not somebody you can rely upon in
normal circumstances  if his cellpoint set-
tings drift hes even worse.
To get rid of
him just say goodbye  or swear repeat-
edly  he's strangely sensitive and won't
hang around long enough to be insulted.
Now's a good time to get a fix on the
geography of the Embarkation
Lobby.
Stand in the middle of the room on the
large Starship Titanic logo and face the
DeskBot. If you nav left you should see a
large single door  that is the entrance to
the main public areas of the ship. Nav left
again and you see a box-like object with a
reflective cover: this is the Succ-U-Bus. Nav left once more and
you see the main door through which you entered the ship after
the Credit Sequence. On the left of that is a door which does not
function. On the right of the main door is the entrance to the
Service Elevator.
Let's take some time now to explore the basic PET functions.
If you click the icon on the top right hand corner you'll see you're
back in Chat-O-Mat mode and your conversation (if it can be
called that) with Krage is still displayed. Using the arrows you can
scroll back through it. The PET automatically changes into Chat-
O-Mat mode and displays who you are talking to whenever a Bot
is activated. If you click on the image of the DoorBot, Fentible will
PET in Baggage mode

return and you can chat to him. Click on the next icon down and you go into Personal
Baggage mode (used to store objects you pick up); below that is Remote Thingummy
mode (used for operating devices on the ship); below that is Designer Room Numbers
mode (collects room addresses); and below that is Real Life mode which you use for
saving games, quitting, adjusting volume and so on. Detailed PET operating instructions
are on pl8g.
If you want to test the whole system and practise with the PET have a shot at send-
ing an object round the ship. Go to the Succ-U-Bus and click on it. It will open with a
foul phlegmy gargle. Thankfully smell has not yet been built into the Starship Titanic
Experience.
The Succ-U-Bus is a basic Bot, a Genuine People Personality who got the
Job by virtue of an astonishingly low vocabulary. Passengers are not advised to enter into

Grand Axial First Class
We drew images from everywhere. One
Canal
minute a wonderful hotel in Tokyo then the
next minute something Ancient Egyptian. |
think the Chrysler Building has always
remained in my mind as being a key
touchstone. It was Oscar and Isabel who
put the whole mnage together  Chrysler
Building, Queen Mary, Tutankhamuns
tomb. They then topped it off with a bit of
Venice which | thought was just a final
crowning touch. %
~ Doucias A
mies i
philosophical debate with the Succ-U-Buses. They'll just talk non-
sense to you. This is not your fault. They are simply not very
bright. Their role on the ship is confined to sending and receiving
things, belching and impersonating Douglas Adams.
Go to Personal Baggage mode in your PET. At the moment all
you've got is your Picture of the Night Sky. Drag the Picture
towards the tray of the Succ-U-Bus  it will disappear into a
Baggage cylinder. Go to Designer Room Numbers in your PEP
(fourth one down). Click on your room chevron then drag it onto
the Succ-U-Bus until you hear a good ping. Then go to Remote
Thingummy (third one down) and highlight the Succ-U-Bus in the
left-hand Box. Then click on SEND. The Succ-U-Bus will send your
Picture of the Night Sky to your room  or at least to the Succ-U-Bus outside your room.
He'll also helpfully tell you whether or not he managed it.
Now that you've got rid of your Baggage, why not do what intelligent passengers
normally do when they board a liner  wander around, stick your nose in everywhere
and wish you'd purchased First Class. Go through the large door to the DeskBots right.
You are now at the edge of a large public space known as The Top of The Well. (For a
detailed plan of this area, look in your First Class Inflight Magazine.) If you move ahead
and then right you will see the First Class Grand Axial Canal. Try and get closer and your
PET will insist that Passengers of your Class are not permitted to enter this area. See
~
the gondola just visible beneath the flares? Don't you just wish you were travelling First
Class?

Parrot Lobby
Parrot Lobby View from The Parrot
Turn away from the.Canal and you will see a flight of steps. Go straight up the steps
and through the door into the Grand Ballroom.
Well, it was going to be the Ballroom. Unfortunately the ship was launched before tt
was ready. Talk to the Bots in here and you'll discover that they know this room better
as the Parrot Lobby or Parrot Room. This is because of the workman's Parrot that has
been left behind in a cage in the centre. You'll hear the Parrot as soon as soon as you
approach him  in fact from now on you're going to hear him rather a lot. Before you
talk to him take a look around: scaffolding, cement, dark corners, a stick. A stick? In fact
it looks more like a perch. So what's the perch doing on a bag of cement in the corner?
And if thats the perch, what's the Parrot standing on? Suspicious. By the way a standard
rule of the Starship Titanic is  if isnt nailed down grab it and put it in your Baggage. So,
in goes the perch.
In front of the Parrot cage is a TV. To check out the channels, go to Remote
Thingummy mode in your PET and click on the TV icon. You'll see the TV controls appear
 ON/OFF and CHANNELS. Turn the TV on and scroll through the channels. Here's
another clue that the ship is not quite prepared for passengers. Channel | has nothing.
> SUMMER
OS
Channel 2
Channel 4

An Uplighter
Parrot in a flap
Click the up arrow: Channel 2 is showing the Weather The pollen count is medium. The
temperature is summer (not high or low, but summer). Channel 3 nothing. Channel 4 
a strange view as if from a remote camera. A room? A wall? A corridor? Channel 5 is
showing a number 27.A room number? A floor number? Channel 6 and 7 nothing. It
doesn't mean much now but it will. Head over to the Succ-U-Bus. On your right is an
uplighter If you move the cursor onto it the magnifying glass appears  definitely some-
thing there to come back to...
Time to talk to the Parrot. You wouldn't expect to get much sense out of a Parrot,
especially a Parrot played by Terry Jones. In fact he's not talking complete nonsense. The
Parrot is a great dispenser of clues: take note that he has more than a passing interest
in chickens. And pistachios.
The perch looks important  it is. It's going to need more than just click and drag to
get it however  first you've got to get rid of the Parrot. Time to get physical. Try drag-
ging the Parrot into your Baggage. He won't like it but, kicking and screaming, he'll go in
eventually, and the cage door will slam shut behind him. It takes more than your PEIHto
hold down this Parrot though  pretty soon he'll escape. Leaving a feather. This will def-
initely come in handy later.
You'll notice that although you can't see him the Parrot is nevertheless making a din.
If we leave the Parrot Lobby and then go back in again hes made his way back into the
cage. How? Well its just one of those little Starship Titanic mysteries that you are going
to have to get used to.
For now it's best to forget the perch  you can come back for it later You could sum-
mon the DoorBot or the BellBot and ask them what has happened  maybe they'd
quite like to talk about Parrots, perches, pistachios, uplighters, chickens and so on... How
"well they respond depends upon how well you question them  and also how helpful
their settings are.

The Top of The Well
Well Shaft right
There's one more thing to do before leaving the Parrot Lobby. Go to Designer Room
Numbers mode in your PET. On the far left you'll see a chevron. Click on it  yes, it's
your assigned SGT Room. On the right hand side of the PET you'll see another chevron
 differently coded. Click on it  it now shows you what room you're in. If you drag it
across to one of the free boxes in the PET you can save it. You'll now be able to send
an object to the Parrot Lobby using this icon.and a Succ-U-Bus. This is another useful
rule: wherever you go in the Starship Titanic, check the room icon and save it  you
never know when you're going to need it.
Exit the Parrot Lobby and move for-
ward, then right. You're now facing The Well.
Take a couple of paces forward  you'll see
a small flight of steps. Climb it. You can now
look out across The Well  you should be
able to see the giant columns of the gallery
which runs round it. Two of the four main
Lifts should also be visible  one on each
side of The Well. If you look down you can
see that you are perched on top of a giant
statue. Below you stretch the Staterooms 
First Class on the higher levels, then Second
Class, then SGT. The tracks for the four Lifts
can be seen descending to The Bottom of
The Well below.
Tilt up and then turn round  you'll
now see another entrance which you will
not have noticed when you came up the
* We were looking for a location for Tit
| wanted the sense that when you found
you'd think oh well, it was there in front of
eyes the whole time. | think it was Os
came up with the notion of it being insi
huge light-fitting: you wouldn't see it
not only is it apparently a light-fitting, but
the wrong way up. You'd have to figure :
- that you're now hanging upside down. 7
created a problem though: if you are
we
out on to the floor, then the Chambe
need to be much smaller than we want
to be. We then decided to make the
fitting the tip of the iceberg: you'd come
the top of the Chamber and not the be
Douctas ADAMS

steps. Move towards it. You are about to
enter Titania's Chamber. Click on the door,
and climb the steps. Go through the next
door. You will be transported down and
round on a platform till you reach the
bottom. You are now in Titania's Chamber,
the heart of the ship's intelligence. Move
ahead  you can make a complete circuit
of the room. You will pass three exits with
Titanias Head
heavy metal doors drawn back.
You should now be able to see the
device which brought you down here. You will also see a figure stretched out, immobile,
in the blue energy field in the centre of the room. This is Titania. Move round till you are
at Titania's head. Click right. Then click down. Her head opens and rods emerge. Click
on the tray which has emerged from her head: a sign appears in your PET 'It's some
sort of slot. Titania is clearly important but for now there is nothing you can do  apart
from make a note to ask the Bots what they know about her...
Move round so your back is to Titania's head. You are facing one of the mirrored exits.
If you click on it a familiar message appears: Passengers of your Class are not permit-
Titania's Chamber

ted to enter this area. Go right and try
the next door This one opens, revealing a
book-lined study. Move to your right and
you'll see a draughtsmans desk. Click on
the small screen on the side of the desk.
This is the Missiv-O-Mat mail system. Its
asking for a log-in. You could try a guess at
whose study this was and enter a name. If
you're halfway right you'll be asked for a
_Leovinus desk
password. And that's where you'll have to
leave it for now unless i 're psychic. (If you genuinely cant wait to become psychic you
Control Panel
can always go to page 144 in the Solutions chapter but it
is cheating.) Click up and away from the Missiv-O-Mat and
go left. You'll see a Box. Go towards it and, in spite of the
warning, click. Click again. And again. The Box opens reveal-
ing a Control Panel with Fuses and a
line of icons. Two of
the Fuses are missing. Remember the icons  a chicken, a
propeller, a tree, a coil. Each one has a switch next to it.
There is also a Succ-U-Bus icon and switch.
Best not fiddle with anything yet. Move back and close up
the Fuse Box. Return to the main Chamber and you will be
directed left. Keep going till you come to the next room.
Enter Unless you want a
fairly low level conversation, it's best
to move on from the Succ-U-Bus. Of course you could
always insult him  that never fails to please. Move left  and you'll see a cheerful looking
filing cabinet with a
large red button.
Go
towards
it.
Under the button
is. a
sien: PUSH
BUTTON TO DIS-
ARM BOMB. Now
that sounds like a
sensible thing to do.
Click on the button.
A Bomb

This of course is a Strategy Guide not a Munitions Help Desk. So you've armed the
Bomb. Instead of looking round for someone to blame, which is of course the normal
human reaction in such cases, you ought to think about how to disarm it. Clearly the
idea is to move all the tumblers until you've entered a code. Question is  what's the
code? No matter how clever you are you're not going to find inspiration here. Exit the
room. You will find you are facing the platform on which you descended into Titania's
Chamber Move the cursor to the top right of the screen until it points upwards  click.
You will now be taken up and out of the Chamber Click again upward, sideways and
then straight ahead till you emerge again at The Top of The Well.
Approaching the Pellerator
Pellerator Controls
Make your way round The Well by Lifts | and 2.On your left you pass a large bronze
cylinder
 this is the Pellerator, a kind of sideways elevator. Stand in front of it. ln Remote
Thingummy mode in your PET highlight the Pellerator Then click on CALL. The door
slides up and you are facing a control panel. Click on it with your cursor and you get a
closer view.
There are six images of rooms. Interesting looking rooms which you'd quite like to
visit. Next to each image is a button. Click on each of the buttons. Bad luck. As you are
only SGT Class you are denied access to all of these but The Top of The Well  which
is where you are already. So, no fun here. Exit by turning round and clicking on the oppo-
site panel.
Keep heading round The Well until you come to the Second Class Canal. On either
side of the Canal, mirroring the Embarkation Lobby and the Parrot Room, is another
public room. Try to enter either of them though and you will find access is denied to
passengers of your Class. Clearly being SGT Class isn't going to solve the ship's prob-
lems or give you the comfort you're used to. Getting an upgrade has to be a priority.

The Animators
For each room or character the
animators would be given a detailed
briefing by Douglas, Oscar and lsabel so
we'd be clear about the story,
atmosphere or game-play issues. Many of
the environments on the ship such as The
Top of The Well and the Canal are huge
and it was important that we understood
that scale. As the drawings were
conceptual one of the challenges was
continuity - especially as there's been a
team of up to six artists at a time
working on the ship. Inevitably, the artists
brought to their environments a level of
interpretation that was very individual: we
had to be careful not to allow our
personal vision to be out of style with the
rest of the Starship Titanic. This was
true even in the way in which we moved
about the ship. In the end we set up rules
which covered animation aspects - how
long would it take to travel from point A
to B for example.
All of this and the sheer beauty and
style of the ship called for a sophisticated
software package and rendering system.
That software was naturally Softimage
and its render system Mental Ray. The
Softimage modelling and animation
capabilities are arguably the best in the
world and Mental Ray, its photo realistic
renderer, was really the only reasonable
option for the job.
Building a model in 3D in Softimage is
like designing a house: from a plan and an
elevation the computer links the
information together to create an exterior
shell. You then have to tell the computer
what the shells made of.
"ll use Titania as an example. She
exists both as a statue and as a Cyborg.
As the statue at The Top of The Well,
she is made out of metal so the first
thing | had to do was to tell it - this is a
material that is refractive. Then | tell it if
it's see-through or not. If it's see-through,
is It reflective like glass? If it is reflective
like glass, how reflective is it? Once the
material's built you give it texture. On
Titania's face on the statue for example, |
told it the material was a metal and then
as a texture | painted on streaks of
oxidation to give the feeling it was
enormous. As a visual aid for that, | used
the Statue of Liberty. Once that's done,
you have a perfect model of an object -
then you can animate it.
One of the greatest challenges was in
rendering such rich environments in time.
In order to resolve this we used the multi-
processing capabilities of the Mental Ray
renderer. Our systems administrator (and
general network guru) wrote a perl script
software which through a simple html

I Sg
ee
interface controlled all of our rendering
jobs for (at one point) up to twenty
processors working twenty-four hours a
day.
When working on a project of this kind
you're part of a team working on an
illusion that has to feel natural:
programmers, artists, sound engineers
and technicians must work in harmony to
pull it off. There was no greater
satisfaction than to see the finished
product, to play the game and walk away
with a big grin thinking | had a part in
that.
John Attard, 3D Animator.
Oscar did the first sketches for the ship
on a flight to LA the day we joined the
project. From that shape came the overall
structure of the ship which was the first
thing that we designed - The Well and
then The Canals being the actual T of
Titanic. Instead of using the real Titanic
with the funnels as the key, what we
used was the T of the name itself.
Isabel Molina, Designer.
The original Maitre d'Bot which Oscar
and Isabel had sketched was very
humanistic. We decided that it wasn't
such a good idea to have a robot that
was so human: it didnt really fit in with
the rest of the characters. Douglas gave
me some sketches but they were just
little stick figures which looked like
Salvador Dali with squiggly hair. We knew
we wanted him to look a bit like the
BarBot but we couldn't really have the
identical face so | came up with the idea
of having it more triangular and it just
went from there. | put in lots of cables to
make it look as though it's in pieces.
Basically | started off with one complete
figure and then just dissected it.
Gillan Best, 3D Animator.
The Sculpture chamber was inspired by
the work of Richard Meier the architect
responsible for the State Museum,
Albany, NY. Meier uses daylight to create
wonderful environments for exhibiting
sculptures and paintings. | originally
envisaged the room as monochromatic
with the play of light focusing attention on
the sculptures: in the room there's a
strong source of daylight and the
sculptures are pin-spotted. We also used
a sophisticated shader in Softimage to
give atmosphere, rather in the way that
smoke is used in theatre or film. In terms
of the sculptures | followed Oscar and
Isabel's details closely but | was given a
lot of freedom in the environment. | tried
to use similar lighting in the Creators
Chamber, with a focus on the Boolean
Cube. The heads were done by
Cyberscanning. The pictures on the walls
are paintings by Oscar.
Bernie Doyle, 3D Animator.

Time to go back to the Lifts and see if
you can find your room.
Work your way round The Well until you
get to Lift number 3 or |  these are the
only Lifts that service the SGT floors. Your
PET will tell you the Lift number when you
stand in front of it. If you find yourself by Lift
number 4 it's worth calling it anyway using
The lifts
your PET. You will get the message: This ele-
vator is in an advanced state of current non-
functionality. Remember this  it will be use-
ful. When you're facing your chosen Lift, go to
Remote Thingummy, highlight the Lift and
click CALL. The doors will open and you will
be greeted by the LiftBot. Nobby, as he is
called, is long-suffering. Ask him about the
war Or his Allenoids. Or even his Blibber
When the LiftBot asks where you would
like to go, you can check your room num-
ber by going to Designer Room Number
and clicking on the chevrons till you get to
G. Nobbington Froat (Nobby)
your own. Then go to Chat-O-Mat and ask
the LiftBot to take you there. Alternatively
in Remote Thingummy you can click on the icon marked GO TO YOUR STATEROOM.
If you attempt to use Lift 2 in spite of the advice which you've been given, you won't
be so lucky. Upon asking for a floor which
houses SGT rooms (basically any floor in
the thirties) the LiftBot will apologise and
suggest you use Lift | or 3  he only goes
down as far as floor 27.
You'll notice that the ambient sound soon
turns from lush First Class to tinny SGT
Class as you approach your floor When
Nobby says you've arrived, swing round and
exit the Lift.
You're now in one of the plush Super
SGT Lobby
Galactic Traveller-Class
Lobbies. Straight

ahead of you is a door. Click on it. You are
facing the SGT Restaurant. This should be
your first clue that you are not travelling in
style. Click on the little lever on the top and
watch carefully: you're going to have to be
quick to catch this. Yes, that was a chicken,
moving faster than it ever did when it was
alive. Listen carefully and you'll hear the
Succ-U-Bus eating tt. And according to the
message on your PET it's the only one
SGT Restaurant
you're allowed. If you retreat from the
Restaurant, its worth taking a look at the menu outside. Clearly a chicken-fanciers delight.
Move left and head for the Succ-U-Bus. Remember you posted your Picture of the
Night Sky? Now's the time to find out if you're in the right place  or if the Succ-U-Bus
really did send the picture correctly. Click on it to open then go to Remote Thingummy.
Click on the Succ-U-Bus icon and click on RECEIVE. After the usual complaints the Succ-
U-Bus will deliver a canister Drag this into your PET and if you are lucky the Photo of
the Night Sky which you sent from the Embarkation Lobby will appear. You have now
mastered the Succ-U-Bus system.
Move right and you'll see a door Head towards it. This is the SGT Leisure Lounge.
Apart from the nice picture you'll notice a Long Stick in a case. Surprisingly if you try
and get this a message appears:
For Emergency Long Stick smash glass. If you attempt to smash the glass with your
puny cursor however, nothing happens. So, if you want the Long Stick you're going to have
Long Stick Dispenser
SGT Lounge

to find something to smash the glass. For a
subtle mood-change, click on the picture.
When you get down to your room, it is
Sit in the chair Relax.
basically a lot of boxes which you have to sort
That's enough relaxing. Head out of the
out. | was thinking of those Japanese hotels,
SGT Leisure Lounge. You now get a good
which are just tubes that you lie in and
view of the rooms. Notice that they're not
everything you want is within a hand's reach,

all at ground level. On the right you'll see a
but here it is mixed up with aeroplane coach
series of mini-elevators.
To reach your room
class and Chinese box puzzle. Our production 
you may have to take one of these. The
team always referred to this as Riff Raff Class,
rooms on the bottom row are |-6,the next
rather than Super Galactic Traveller Class. 
_
level 7-12 and the top 13-18.To work out
=== =
~=~=~
DOUGLAS ADAMS

which room is which stand outside any
ene
room and go to Remote Thingummy  this
will show your current location.
SGT Stateroom
If you have a high number take a mini-elevator  the buttons which operate them are
obvious. When you finally reach your correct room, the door will open revealing it in all

its splendour. Not quite as grand as you were expecting perhaps? Your job now is to
open up the furniture in the right order, spurred on by the promise of an upgrade from
the in-room TV. Believe it or not there is a logic to this  your main aim should be to
provide a sturdy enough platform for you to approach the bed, click on it and climb up.
So, look in Remote Thingummy for objects that match the shape or size of the room
furniture. Highlight each object and then click on the controls. Once you've created a
stable platform, move onto the bed and click on the TV which will automatically emerge.
Now click on the TV in Remote Thingummy and turn on the TV using the controls on
the right. Go to Channel 3 and listen to the instructions carefully  you are just one
Inflight Magazine away from an upgrade. Now leave the room and go back to the Succ-
U-Bus in the Lobby. Open him up then click RECEIVE in Remote Thingummy. When the
canister arrives, drag it into your PET  it contains the SGT Inflight Magazine. If you look
carefully you will see that by a miracle of planning your SGT Inflight Magazine looks
astonishingly like the one in your First Class Inflight Magazine  only tinier.
Head back for the Lift and ask the LiftBot to take you to The Top of The Well. As soon
as you're there go straight to the Embarkation Lobby
Approach the DeskBot (if possible with a level of swagger appropriate to your imminent
Second Class status). Activate her by clicking, Tell her you have the Magazine. Drag it from
your PET and place it on her head. (This is not normally the way to persuade a deskclerk
to upgrade you but as it happens it works quite adequately on the Starship Titanic so
don't nit-pick OK?)

The DeskBot will upgrade you to Second Class and you can now begin to enjoy a
whole new lifestyle. By the way, you'll find that if you talk to Marsinta for long enough
her mood will shift from downright murderous to oily smarm. She'll also veer wildly
from curt to talkative. Keep your eye on the indicators on the left hand side of your PET
and see if you can work out exactly what
her settings are.
Now you're Second Class you'll want
to explore all those forbidden rooms. A
word of caution however. Do not for one
moment believe that you are through
with SGT Class. Even should you some-
how achieve First Class status you will still
have to return to the SGT areas to com-
plete puzzles.
Marsinta Drewbish

The Mother Of All Succ-U-Buses,
For now though theres somewhere
else you ought to visit. The Bilge Room.
This was closed when you first boarded
the ship, but now the ship has taken off it's
accessible.
And it's worth visiting.
Take the Service Elevator Don't bother
with the bottom button  it will just take
you down to the keel and there's nothing
important to see or do there. The middle
button takes you to the Bilge Room. This is
where all the rubbish on the ship is sent. It's
also the place where anything you've sent
turns up if you got the address wrong.
The Bilge Room is dominated by a giant
Succ-U-Bus. This is no ordinary Succ-U-
Bus. This is the Mother Of All Succ-U-
If you think of the ship as an immense
garburator (| must say | would encourage
people not to) then this is the bit at the
bottom where all the sludge comes out. This
came about after wondering where things
would end up if they got lost in the ship. Well,
they end up in the sludge at the bottom of
the garburator. So that's where the idea for 
the Mother of all Succ-U-Busses came from.
| could invent something here and say
that | thought of it after we had somebody
round to fix the garburator.
But | didnt. 
DOuGLas ADAMS
Buses, known simply as  Mother If you try sending or receiving anything down here
you'll find that Mother is not working, I've got a bit of bilious build up in my throat is

her explanation. Roughly translated this
means: There appears to be something
stuck in the pipes which really shouldn't
be here and which you as a gameplayer
should realise is highly significant How
are you going to get this something out?
How can you make a Succ-U-Bus per-
form an involuntary action? Let's just say
that until you've been to the Parrot Lobby  Meet Brobostigon
you don't stand a chance. But - you've
been to the Parrot Lobby. Remember the struggle with the Parrot? Have a look in your
Baggage  is the Feather still there? Now just rub a couple of neurones together  think
feathers and noses. Yes. Take the Feather and stick it onto the Succ-U-Bus. Now go to
Remote Thingummy, highlight the Succ-U-Bus and click SEND.
The Succ-U-Bus doesn't like this. One very large sneeze ejects a body.
A rather nicely
dressed body at that. This is Brobostigon. It's worth calling the DoorBot or the BellBot
down here and having a chat with them about Brobostigon. If you're lucky you just might
find out a bit more about what's been going on.
Inspect the body: another rule on board the Starship Titanic is 
if there's a body,
inspect it. Click on the body until two objects appear in your PET Titanias Olfactory
Centre and a Fuse. Look carefully at the latter Remember the Control Panel in
Leovinus's study? Perhaps it's time to return.
Take the Service Elevator back to the Embarkation Lobby. While you're passing through,
chat to the DeskBot. Who knows, she may be in a better mood.
It's also worth check-
ing what new areas of
the ship have become
available
now _ that
you're Second
Class.
Head back round The
Well to the rooms by
the Second Class Canal
which were closed to
you earlier
Second Class Grand Axial
Canal

The Sculpture Chamber
Some Useful Sculptures
Try the room on the left. Enter and go to Designer Room Numbers. Click the chevron
to identify  this should be the Sculpture Chamber. Save the icon just in case. Ahead of
you Is a giant SCSI cable. Its big but is it art?
If you move left you will see another statue. Move in closer Remind you of anything?
Go to Chat-O-Mat and take a good look at the BellBot, Play with the levers  they
return to their original position but they certainly sound as though they're working. In
fact, each time you pull on the lever. you'll see the indicators on the PET changing. Clearly
these statues affect the Bots in some way. Work your way round and check out the next
statue. Not difficult to guess who this one is  the DoorBot. Carry on all the way back

The Creators Chamber
to the door, clicking the levers just once on each statue. You've not met all the Bots yet
but you should also recognise the LiftBot and the DeskBot. If you revisit each Bot now
you may notice some differences in the way they behave.
A Familiar Face
Now head across to the other room which
was barred earlier Go to Remote Thingummy
and click on the identifying chevron. The
Creators Chamber Save the address just in case.
What are we looking at here? A Boolean
cube suspended in mid-air with a jumble of let-
ters which look as though they need decoding,
Move right. There's a lever Pull it. Nothing hap-
pens. Is it broken? Maybe a Fuse has gone.
Where have you seen a Fuse Box? The study off
Titania's Chamber. We could go straight there
or we could just look around a
little more.
There are three hologram statues in all  each
with a view of the cube. Click on them and they
revolve: Scraliontis, Brobostigon and Leovinus. The Creators. So what does the lever do?
Time to go back to Titania's Chamber and try the Fuse Box.

Bringing the Bots to lite
Originally we were intending to use Text
To Speech rather than pre-recorded
actors voices. The idea was that since
VelociText would be assembling responses
on the fly from small modular phrases, we
could automate all kinds of verbal
characteristics. However, it turned out
that Text To Speech at its current level
of development becomes very wearing on
the ear over the long haul, and indeed
over the medium haul. Anything over
about seven words in fact. This meant
that we had to follow an alternative
strategy of getting the responses pre-
recorded by actors. lt made an already
Herculean task at least four times as big.
I'm looking forward to Text To Speech
becoming something you can actually listen
to. Actors, | guess, are not.
Douglas Adams
VELOCITEXT
VelociText is the language engine for the
Starship Titanic. Its called VelociText
because it helps writers quickly bring
their characters to life. One way to
understand it is to think of it as part
waitress and part cook, as shown in the
example below.
Imagine yourself in a diner. A waitress
comes up to you with a pad of pre-printed
order forms and asks what you want. You
might say the special please, I'll have the
special, or  a hamburger medium-rare
with mustard on the side. She'll check the
blocks on the form that correspond to
the request. If necessary (mustard on the
side?), she'll also write a note at the
bottom describing detailed requests.
When the cook gets an order form, he
can understand many orders at a glance.
The first two orders both resulted in
essentially identical forms, both with a box
checked for the special. The third order
only requires detailed reading of the part
about the mustard being on the side.
When the cook reads the form, he
understands the waitresss translation of
what you want and responds accordingly.
How does this relate to the Starship
Titanic? Well, when you talk to a
character by typing on the keyboard, your
message goes to the waitress part of
VelociText. It does its best to put the
underlying meaning of what you said into a
common structure. This structure is sent
to the character you addressed (the
cook) for a response.
While similar in some ways to an order
sheet, the structure is organised to
represent general language instead of the
menu for The Restaurant at The End of
The Universe. It has a set of high-level
categories, similar to the special box.
From these, the character can tell if
they've been asked a question, been
insulted, or other sentence-wide notions.
We developed these high-level structures
to speed the character's understanding of

SS
the essence of your messages.
The lower levels of structure might tell
the character who is doing what to or
from whom (Please oil the BellBot). For
other types of sentences, it might show
what object has a particular state (It is
dark in here). This part of the analysis is
based on a
linguistics theory called case
grammar, particularly the work of Dr
Roger Schank.
So far, all the dialogue has had to do
with the activities in the particular scene,
in this case, having a meal at a diner. But
you'd expect your waitress to be able to
talk about other parts of life as well. You
can expect that from the Starship Titanic
Bots too. The messages that the
waitress would write on the order form
are sent to computer code that
represents the room in which the
conversation occurs. More general
questions are sent to code that
represents the character itself. This is
where the true personality of the
character lies. Catch phrases, moods, and
old war stories are woven together to
provide an illusion of intelligence.
Niow, if your message still hasn't
triggered a response, either based on the
natural activity in the scene or on the
character's personality, VelociText will go
through it in great detail and give the
character hints about what might be
appropriate.
VelociText handles events, too. So
when you enter The Bar, the BarBot
might be moved to greet you. If you insult
the DeskBot, you might trigger a mood
change. When an appropriate response is
found, the sound clips and any events are
served back to you. The characters may
talk, sigh, or laugh. They may shrug or
even leave the room. And now the
dialogue is back in your hands.
Linda Watson, July 1997
Virtus Corporation
SPOOKITALK
Velocitext was augmented with a set of
conversation systems by Jason Williams
and Richard Millican using their creation
SpookiTalk:
Velocitext is an excellent parser, on
relatively simple sentence forms. The
process of ticking boxes on a form to
indicate the primary information in the
sentence is generally very good, but is
only capable of showing as many items as
it has tick-boxes - if the input is too
complicated, it Just can't fit all the
information onto the form!
For example, the player might say:
\What if | send this chicken through
the Succ-U-Bus?
Or they could phrase the same
question as:
What do you think would be the result
of me sending this chicken through the
Succ-U-Bus?
VelociText handles the first question
admirably, but gets understandably
confused by the second. So, we applied a
pre-processing system to the player
aaa
See

{
inputs. This looks for and replaces
common phrases that we can distil into a
simpler form for parsing by Velocitext.
We also needed the capacity to chat
to the player like a real person - there is
no-point in constructing a fagade of
intelligence if the first thing the player
asks sidesteps it entirely and exposes a
shallow reality.
Its impossible to totally eliminate
repeats, but we ve done what we can to
reduce the chance of you hearing the
same thing twice: the player has to (for
example) insult the character frequently
before we will be forced to repeat a
response.
We also put a lot of work into avoiding
catch-alls - the phrases that we use
when we can't make head or tail of the
player's input (the | don't understand
response). As well as matching specific
questions, we added loose matches for
types of questions - for example, you can
ask the DoorBot Do you like (apples)?
and he will give a suitable answer for any
object or activity you care to name. While
it may not give any particularly useful
information, this just helps avoid the
dreaded catch-alls!
One thing that distinguishes real people
from computer-game characters is the
depth of their knowledge, giving an ability
to converse on a variety of topics which
might not be at all related to the game
universe. However, opening up the subject
matter about which the player can
converse changes things somewhat -
instead of having to match a medium-
sized mountain of player inputs, we would
somehow have to be able to match an
infinite (and particularly mountainous)
universe of Inputs. The only feasible way
out was to cheat!
KHlence, we added a database of over
12,000 quotes to the parsing process. lf
were having trouble understanding what
the player is trying to say, then we check
to see if any of our quotes appear in
their input, to give us clues about what
they may have said.
The quotes cover a wide range of
topics. For example, there are over a
thousand quotes from Douglas's books,
so if the player mentions an alliterative
residuator we know that they re trying to
be a smart-ass. Or if they mention
Zachary, we know they're probably
talking about a man, while Cindy is
probably a reference to a woman. If they
say the grass is greener on the other
side, perhaps they're just being
philosophical. Although few people are
likely to name balantiocheilus
melanopterus as their favourite variety of
fish, the game will recognise it!
;
A further feature we introduced is it
handling. Look at a simple conversation,
and it may go something like this:
What is this animal?
lt is @ chicken.
Can it fly?
OF course, the word it, in this context,
really means chicken. The character thus
needs to remember any objects, actions,

use
people, etc, which have recently cropped
up in the conversation, so that it can
answer questions such as:
Where is that?
Who is she?
What is one of those
Why did they do that?
This in itself resulted in a large
database of important concepts from the
1,000 character responses, so that
characters will know what it is they have
just said!
A, vital element that separates a
sentence from a conversation is the topic
of conversation. Starship Titanic uses a
connected discourse system to keep
track of what characters are talking
about. Some of the discourse is cunningly
scripted, so that we simply ignore what
the player says, and continue the
discourse as if replying to what they said.
Other discourse looks for variations on
simple yes and no answers, while a few
bits are very complicated, and carefully
coded to provide an intelligent
conversation based on the responses you
make.
The characters also remember what
you have been talking about in your
conversations. This allows them to
chastise the player when he/she has
repeated themselves, or to enquire about
the results of a former conversation e.g.
Did you find the chicken you were looking
for earlier?
The characters are made deeper still
by their cellpoints, which allow them to
have various moods, and react to the
way the player treats them. For example,
if you are rude to the BarBot, he will
become annoyed with you, and become
quite unpleasant - or if you're polite to
him, he will become much nicer. It's a great
way of making the game more interesting,
because the player has to influence the
mood of the characters in order to
discover vital information or complete
puzzles.
So why is it called SpockiTalk?
Conversations between the Dialogue
Team members often went like this:
Jason: Hey, that was a good answer
+o my question! | didnt make him say that
- when did you do that?
Richard: Me? No, | never coded
anything like that.
Jason: Oooh, spooky! Is it lunch-time
yet?
Jason Williams, March 98
TOV

In the study, open the Control Panel. Is there anything
which could be a hologram control? Try the bottom
icon which looks like a coil  turn the knob to the right.
Before you go, remember the Blue Fuse you found on
Brobostigons body? Go to Remote Thingummy and
drag it onto the control panel - it fits on the second slot
down. So now you know: thats the Fuse for the pro-
peller Wherever the propeller is. As you're leaving take
another look at the desk and the Missiv-O-Mat. Try
entering the names of the three creators  Leovinus,
,
Brobostigon and Scraliontis. Each one demands the
Control Panel
input of a password. You're on the right track.
Before you go, return to the Bomb Room and have
another go at defusing the Bomb. If you click on it you'll force it to start tts countdown
again from 1000. So, even if you cant defuse it you can at least delay it. From now on
you're going to have to make regular trips down here to disturb the countdown.
Back to the Creators Chamber. Click on the lever  and this time watch it work. The
statues collapse as the energy beam is turned eff. Now go to each statue position in
turn and look at the cube. The Creator's viewpoint in each case reveals a different word:
THIS, THAT, OTHER. Passwords?
Back to Leovinus's study and the Missiv-O-Mat: tt shouldn't take you long to allocate
the correct Missive passwords. Now you can start reading the secret mail that flowed
between the Creators on the day before the launch of the Starship Titanic. Your task
should soon be clear  to find out where Brobostigon and Scraliontis concealed Titania's
body parts and return them before the bomb goes off or the ship crashes. Of course
 you do already have her Olfactory Centre. Move round until you are next to her head.
Click on it so the rods emerge. Go to
Personal
Baggage, grab the Olfactory
Centre and drag it onto the head  it slots
in perfectly. One down  but how many
to go? Maybe it's time to find your new
room. Check the address
in Designer
Room Numbers and head for the appro-
priate Lift.
The 2nd Class Lobbies are an even
more pleasant version of SGT Class, with
The Second Class Lobby
their own mini-elevators to take you to

The Second Class Stateroom
the higher rooms in each Lobby. This is
where you can truly savour the Starship
Titanic Experience. Enter your new room.
Well, you asked for a view didnt you?
Even if you didn't you've got one. Take a
look at the windows. Click on one and
_& Second Class represents moving upwards _
-a lot in terms of desirability when you reach it
but it is still somewhat generic. |
have stayec
in an awful lot of hotel rooms exactly like that
all over the United States. One of the features
:
~
you always find
of rooms inAmerican
your PET suggests For a better view why
_buginess hotels is that jul
ou are
tine
not try the Promenade Deck? Good
=
dein ab ae ownoes
oer
idea. But not quite yet. Try the other Wwin-
Your pistachio nuts. 7 ie
e
dow  this is clearly a room with a sense
oo
JOUGLAS ee
of humour.
MeN Se uve A UIE
Sod RDNA
csi ene
There's a lot to see in here: bowls of
sweets, pistachios, liquorice. Luxury. Did | say pistachios? And who else has been talking
about pistachios? Yes the Parrot. And take a second look at those bows. You're looking
for body parts remember? Does this remind you of anything? Not the prettiest ear in
the world but an ear nevertheless, Unfortunately these bowls won't drag into your PET.
Maybe they would if they were empty! But they don't empty  you can fiddle about
with them but it doesnt look as though you're allowed to eat them. Time to get the
Parrot.
Head back to the Parrot Lobby.You're going to have to be on the ball here. In Remote
Thingummy, grab hold of the Parrot and drag it into your PET. It will scream but just
ignore it. Now move quickly to the Succ-U-Bus. Click on the Succ-U-Bus to open it. Go

+7
a
to
Baggage
mode.
Drag the
Parrot
towards the tray. The Succ-U-Bus
will
accept it and put it into a cylinder Now go
to Designer Room Numbers and highlight
your 2nd Class Room. Drag the icon onto
the Succ-U-Bus. It will be accepted with a
ping. Now go to Remote Thingummy, high-
light the Succ-U-Bus then click on SEND.
And say goodbye to the Parrot for a while.
Back to the Lift and down to your
room. Go straight to the Succ-U-Bus and
Parrot meets Pistachios
open it. Go to Remote Thingummy, high-
light the
Succ-U-Bus
and
click
on
RECEIVE. You'll hear the sound of the Parrot arriving. Now go to the bowl of pistachios
on the bedside table and rustle them  this will alert the Parrot to their presence. Within
seconds he'll fly over and wolf the lot. Click on the bowl and it will unscrew from the
table  you can now drag it into your PET where it will be indicated as Titania's Ear. Alll
right so it doesn't look much like an ear when itssspinning round in your PET  just bear
in mind it belongs to a totally artificial cyberintelligence.
Those readers with a medical degree may by now have worked out that we are look-
ing for two ears, two eyes, probably a
nose, maybe a mouth and perhaps some
other centres to go with our Olfactory
Centre.
Time to go to the Promenade Deck as
the helpful porthole suggested. Return to
the Lift. After you've summoned it you'll
notice that one of the options on the left
is BOTTOM OF THE WELL. You might as
well have a look now  on the basis that
:
2
you never know what might be important
The Bottom of The Well
later and later you might not get the
chance. The Bottom Of The Well is very grand  the only imperfection being a small ball
you should be able to see in the middle of the floor Go over to it. It's a LiftBot Head,
looking rather forlorn in such a space. In fact this is about as close to pathos as youre
going to get on the Starship Titanic. Drag the little Head and put it in your PET. Check
all the Lifts  if one of his heads is down here then what's in its place? Its worth noting

that you can only enter
We looked at the original Titanic of course. It's very attractive,
Lifts | and 3 down here 
but it's not exactly art deco. In fact French liners are more how
Lifts 2 and 4 are therefore
you expect the Titanic to have been. We looked at 50s American
in some way connected.
electrical appliances, fridges, cookers and so on because they are
Return now to The Top
all such good examples of Streamline. You can see a lot of that
of The Well and try the
influence at work in the actual design of the Bots. We were also
Pellerator again. You'll find
very influenced by the architecture of the Modern Movement
that your Second
Class
which ironically borrowed heavily from ship design. So we took
status
offers you many
architecture that drew from ships to design our own ship  you
more options. Go closer
can see the influence in the exterior details of the Titanic. Oscar
to the Control Panel. You
also looked at bone shapes, skeletons from dinosaurs and so on
now
have access to
all
when he was working on the external shape. #
three rooms on the left 
ISABEL MOLINA, DESIGNER
_ oe
:
the Promenade Deck, the
a
Music Room and the Bar.
The Bar  perhaps you
ought to pay a visit there before taking a walk on the Promenade Deck.
As you enter the Bar just feel that relaxing ambient sound relax you. Ahead of you Is
the BarBot, polishing a glass in his own distinctive way. Go over to the end of the Bar
and turn to face him. There's a TV on the bar counter. Using Remote Thingummy turn it
Fortillian Bantoburn OPerfluous

+
4
on. You'll see the ingredients
for a cocktail  the Titanic
Titillator Now go to the
middle of the Bar and press
the
bell. The BarBot
will
come over and hand you a
glass. Do what you would do
in any bar  take the glass
and put it in your Baggage.
Then start talking. The best
place to get clues for this
puzzle is right here in the bar
 from the BarBot himself.
He's pretty good at explain-
ing what's happened, what's
wrong, what he needs and where you can find it. When he's not lying of course. Or ram-
bling aimlessly about his favourite sport Nib. Or insulting you. The BarBot is blessed with
a complex set of cellpoint settings and you're gaing to have to fix that before you can
be certain you're getting the truth.
As he'll explain, hes in a loop attempting to make a cocktail.
Your job is to search the ship for the ingredients and bring them
back to him. But why should you bother? Because on the shelf
behind him is something you want The Vision Centre - and he
won't fetch it until you've freed him. So what are you looking for?
Pured Starlings, a Crushed TV, a Lemon and a slug of Signurian
Vodka. Just another run-of-the-mill cocktail then.
Where have you seen any of these objects? You clearly haven't
yet been in a room with starling pure on tap (although it might
be worth looking again at the SGT Restaurant menu). There are
plenty of TVs around the ship but how do you crush one? And
you would have noticed a lemon on the loose. As usual the solu-
tion is to ask the Bots  one of them always knows the answer,
just as long as their cellpoint settings are right...
In the meantime, the best you can do is to search for rooms
on the Ship that you've not yet visited. Back to the Pellerator and
head for the Promenade Deck. As soon as the door opens you
should know you're in the right place. By all means admire the
Titanic Titillator

view, but as you reach the end of the deck
and turn round  think starlings. Watch
them wheeling innocently around the
deck. How are you going to trap and
pure them? The nets don't drag. Head
down to the giant ventilation fan at the
end. From the mess underneath it, some-
3
;
thing must have got caught up and
Starlings Flying
Hammer dispenser
squished
already. Perhaps
if you wait,
another one might fly too close. Or per-
haps if you're clever you can give them no alternative. Go to the big control panel half
way down the deck. Now before you do anything, move left  you should be looking at
a large cabinet with a picture of a hammer on it. This is a Hammer Dispenser And you
need a hammer  remember the Long Stick Dispenser in the SGT Leisure Lounge? Click
on it. It doesnt open. Try the button on the top: you will get a message 'In case of
Emergency Hammer Requirement, poke with a Long Stick. Brilliant. You need a
Hammer to get the Long Stick and a Long Stick to get the Hammer.What else have you
got in your Baggage? A Feather. A Perch. A LiftBot Head. A Perch? Well, it's worth a try.
Drag the Perch out and poke the button.
The cabinet opens and you can now drag
your Hammer into the PET. Turn back to
the Fan Control. Click the ON button. The
message comes up - Unfortunately this
Fan
Controller
has blown
a Fuse.
Remember the propeller icon in the Fuse
Box? Time to head back to Leovinuss study
 |'ll assume by now you know the way.
Go to the Control Panel: if there isn't a
Fuse by the Fan Control then you ought
to make that trip to the Bilge Room right
now and find it. If the Fuse is there  turn
the blue fan knob to the right. Then close
up the Box and head back to the
Promenade Deck. At the fan control click
the ON button. Then click the SPEED
The Promenade Deck

button until the dial reads FAST. Stand well back. If you are a bird-lover of a sensitive dis-
position, close your eyes and turn down the sound. If on the other hand you like seeing per-
fectly innocent starlings being turned into pure then turn up the sound, relax and enjoy.
The problem now is  where did the pured starlings go? You could always ask the
BellBot  he might be able to help.
So the SGT Restaurant could be a good place to start looking. Just when you thought
you were through with SGT Class. If you go down to the Restaurant (perhaps we should
use the term chicken machine from now on) you will find that if you click on the sauce
dispensers at the top a message appears:
Please place food source beneath dis-
penser for sauce delivery. Place the glass
under the pipes and nothing happens.
Now you could always try fooling the
machine by sticking the Parrot in there
but to be honest it won't work. What you
need is a genuine food source. The logical
thing to do of course would be to alter
the machine so it delivered more chick-
ens. But how do you do that? Remember
The SGT Restaurant
the chicken icon in the Control Panel in
Leovinus's
Study? So far you've been
putting Fuses in  perhaps you can make the chicken machine work in your favour by
taking Fuses out?
Head back to your old SGT Lobby and the chicken
machine. If you click on the lever now you will find that the
chicken velocity has been reduced  it's easy to catch the
little fellow and place him in your Baggage. Now put the
Chicken under the sauce dispensers  you will have to
experiment here. You may end up with quite a mess of
mustard but if you persevere you'll find the right position
to deliver a good slosh of what is, according to the colour
Starling Pure. Place your glass underneath the Chicken 
Chicken with pure
if you're clever you can fool this highly intelligent piece of
hardware into delivering the Pure.
While you are still here don't forget you've now got a Hammer. Go to the SGT
Leisure Lounge and approach the Long Stick Dispenser Take out the Hammer  and
smash. As soon as the glass falls away, grab that Long Stick and put it in your Baggage.

Now you've got the Starling Pure, the rest of this puzzle is easy. All you need is a
crushed TV set and a lemon. You'll have seen lots of TVs round the ship. But try picking
any of them up 
its impossible. You
need help from a
member
of the
crew. But who Is
likely to assist you
in crushing a TV?
Forget
Fentible.
Marsintas
mean
enough to crush
anything but if she
knew it was going
to help you she
wouldn't lift a fin-
ger. Nobby's too
attached to the Lift
to:
help. Which
BellBot in Destructive Mood
leaves  Krage. A
free spirit. A rebel. And maybe not bright enough to question what he's doing. But which
TV? Why not annoy the Parrot and take his?
So  go to the Parrot Lobby, call Krage and talk rt over.
Actually Krage doesn't need much persuading. He enjoys
smashing TVs. Watch as he picks it up, heads forThe Top of The
Well  and throws it off. Easy. Now all you have to do ts go to
The Bottom of The Well and drag the TV into your Baggage.
Getting a lemon is more complicated.
Talk to the Bots about
it and, unless they're lying, the only place you're going to get a
lemon
is the Arboretum. Unfortunately, access to the
Arboretum is restricted to First Class Passengers only. So how
do you get an upgrade? Try asking the advice of a Bot. You'll get
the same answer from all of them: only the DeskBot can autho-
rise an upgrade and the DeskBot Is notoriously unhelpful. If only
4
you could change her character. Well, maybe you can.  Marsintas Cellpoints
Remember the Sculpture Chamber? Time to go back there and
check out the statue that looks like Marsinta..

pions
The First Class Lob by
Fathima
TO
ae
Now go to the Embarkation Lobby and
be brazen: ask Marsinta straight out for an
upgrade. If you got the levers right then
she will be disgustingly pleasant to you.
She will also upgrade you to First Class.
Yes, now you are truly master of your
own destiny. You are of course also still
hurtling out of control through space,
whilst your time is being taken up solving
a series of bizarre and utterly meaningless
puzzles  but that's Life.
As you glide out of the Embarkation Lobby with your shiny PET displaying your new-
found status to a completely deserted ship, you will notice that access to the First Class
Canal is now open. At the jetty a gondola awaits, ready to take you to the far end of
the Canal.
Before that you must visit your new room. Take the Lift.As you step out into the First
Class Lobby you should at last feel comfortable  this is of course the kind of treatment
Channel 4
First Class Stateroom
you were expecting. Note how easy it is to find your room
 no fiddly little Lifts, just grand entrances, grand style. Time
to relax again and try the TV. Go to channel 4. Remember the
strange view of a room and a chevron? When you look at it
now do you recognise the look of a First Class room? If only
you could identify the room chevron you would be able to
go to the room and see what's happening.
Fortunately a small cheat exists within your PET. Yes, you
can create your own
room
addresses
using
the
CUR-
RENT LOCATION
chevron in the right-
hand box. Holding
down the shift key,
click on the chevron
until it matches the
one on the TV. (Just
to make things more
difficult, the one on
the TV
is upside

down.) You should find, if you've
got it right, that a First Class room
address appears in your PET. Save
the chevron by dragging it into a
spare box. Then go to the room.
ls
In Remote Thingummy you'll
PET in Remote Thingummy
see that as well as TV controls you
can also operate the lights. By toggling the light switches you can tell which light is not
working.
To actually reach it you're going to need help.Time for the helpful BellBot again.
Just call him in and ask him to reach the light for you. He'll be glad to assist and within
seconds another of Titanias missing bits  her eye  will be spinning pleasantly in your
PEA.
After all this hard work you can now reward yourself with a romantic cruise. Go back
to The Top of The Well and head for the jetty by the First Class Canal. As you approach
you will see a gondola waiting. Climb in.
Your RowBot awaits

al
Now sit back and relax as the RowBot
steers you along this architectural master-
piece. If you look up and to the right, you
will see Pellerators making their journey
to and from the First Class areas.
When the gondola arrives at the far
end of the Canal, disembark and head
straight for the woven gates. This is the
Arboretum. Click on it and the gate will
unfurl. Ahead of you is a lemon grove and
The Approach to the Arboretum
a small
control
panel with SUMMER
marked upon it.
PLEASE
iBT
TOUCH
arate
The Arboretum in Summer
Click on it and in your PET you'll see:"The seasonal adjustment switch is not opera-
tional at the present time. Now there's a clue. In the meantime theres the small mat-
ter of the lemon. Take the Long Stick from your PET and take a swipe at some of the
lemons. If you're lucky one will fall from a tree: drag it into your PET. While you're facing
the Arboretum, move left and then straight ahead. This will take you to a small Pellerator

In fact if you click on it, it turns out to be
not a Pellerator but a broom cupboard.
Inside is a fire hose and another Succ-U-
Bus. Talk to the Succ-U-Bus by all means 
more useful is the fire hose hanging next
to it. On the principle that if it's not nailed
down it's useful, drag the hose into your
Pea,
You now have the lemon, the crushed
TV and a
glass of pureed starlings. All you
need is a slug of Signurian Vodka. The best
place to start looking for this is the Bar: if
The Broom Cupboard
Fortillian can supply it then you are ready to release him from his cocktail loop.
To reach
the Bar either hop in a gondola again or take the Pellerator which does in fact come down
to the Arboretum: it's on the opposite side of the Canal from the broom cupboard.
Approach the Bar and summon the BarBot. Drag the ingredients for the Titanic
Titillator across onto the bar top. You can tell Fortillian that you have his ingredients but
Fortillian mixes a Titanic Titillator

he'll realise anyway. All you have to do now is watch as he mixes his cocktail  and he
knows how to mix a cocktail all right. Once he's finished, he'll hand you the Vision Centre
from the shelf behind him  all you have to do is ask.
As you can see, the Titanic Titillator is a drink to avoid. You may want to return here
later just to see if Fortillian's recovered but to be honest he's not going to be in a fit
state to help.
Although you've been playing this game for hours you may have noticed that so far you've
only managed to retrieve three of Titania's body parts. If it's any consolation, the remain-
ing bits are even more difficult to find. You do however have a vast array of useful tools
collected in your Personal Baggage, and you'll discover that the pace of the game
increases rapidly from here on.
Step back into the Pellerator. You'll see from the control panel there are two rooms
you've not yet visited. On the top right is the First Class Restaurant. Middle left is the
Music Room. Let's go there.
As you enter the Music Room the first thing you notice is that there is no music. This
is because the band  Boppy Headcase and his Laidback Loafers  are waiting for you
to take control.
As you approach the band you will see a control panel. This is divided
7
Pe

into four sections, corresponding to each
of the instrumentalists.
The various knobs
and sliders control different facets of the
music:
One changes the pitch.
One changes the tempo.
One inverts the music.
One plays it backwards.
Press the red button in the middle of
the control panel. The band will begin to
play. Of course, like everything else on the
Ship, they're malfunctioning.
Your job is to
work out what they are trying to play, and
reconfigure all the instruments so they get
it right. If you find this difficult, don't worry.
It is difficult.
Unfortunately
tinis
chapter
was
called
HINTS

and thats all you're
getting.
So how do you
know
when
you
have
solved
the
music puzzle? Well,
it just sounds

right.
Like
music
should.
If you're
really having trouble
then why not sit
down in one of the
comfortable, helpful
seats in the corner.
Music Room
The Music Room started as an excuse
for putting in a piece of music | had written.
lt was also an attempt to make a jigsaw
out of a piece of music. Whenever you see
a piece of music being played in the cinema,
it always drives me crazy that there is so
rarely any attempt to make the picture
accord with what you are actually hearing.
We set out with the clear intention that we
would accurately mode! what you see
and hear being played. Obviously this was
relatively simple in the case of the guy
banging his head. We couldn't
be ue
accurate with the bass guy because the
trade-off between the complexity of the _
_ prob lem and the number of. people who'd
 recognise we'd solved it di idn't add up given 
the other complications it would cause. ae
iu
_The-one that v was rely important for me ne

The Sound
THE STUBIO
Early in the production process Sound
Designer John Whitehall began working
with Douglas on creating the sound for
Starship Titanic. He was also in charge
in the studio during the long weeks of
recording all the dialogue, parrot noises
and Suec-U-Bus groans.
Douglas enjoyed working with John
again. He was one of the studio
managers at the BBC when we did
Hitchhiker for radio all those year ago. It
felt very comfortable and natural going
back into the sound studio and putting
actors into small booths and making
them say things that couldn't possibly
make sense to them again. It felt like
home.
Actors Laurel Lefkow, Quint Boa,
Dermot Crowley and Jonathan Kydd
worked intensively fleshing out the
characters. Douglas was also able to
bring on board some old friends: Terry
Jones and Phil Pope.
Phil is one of those people who has
such a vast array of talents that most
people don't realise it's the same person.
He is the only person | know for whom
having a number one hit record marked
the real nadir of his creative life. (He
won't thank me for mentioning that he
wrote The Chicken Song for Spitting
Image.) As well as being an almost
infinitely better musician than The
Chicken Song would suggest, he's a
brilliant comedy actor. He very nearly
became an opera singer as well. He does
a wonderfully silly performance as the
Mitre dBot, but he also instantly
recognised the character of the LiftBot
and got right under its skin. Phil and
Michael clearly knew the same people.
Terry Jones is an old, old friend, but
we'd never actually worked together. He
got so hot prancing and squawking
around the studio booth as the Farrot
that he had to strip off. The artistic
integrity of the part demanded it, as it
so often does with Terry.
THE MUSIC
Wix is a very old friend, and | was
delighted to have an opportunity actually
to work with him, says Douglas. He and
| used to have the same piano teacher
at school (it worked a lot better for him
than mel) but | lost touch with him for
years until | saw him playing on stage
with Paul McCartney. He worked with
Paul on a couple of tours and albums. He
is a great musician and a lovely fellow to

work with. He's done all the Proper
Joined Up Music for the project. I've
done some of the Forearm Across The
Keyboard stuff (| think we call it ambient
music) where we needed some late
additions to the soundtrack. The one and
only exception to this is the music for
the Music Room puzzle, which is also by
me. It's a tune that | wrote on the guitar
many years ago and then later
transcribed for synthesiser, and I've
always wanted to do something with it.
Well, if | couldn't put it on my own CD-
ROM, where could | put it?
Gago oN

Head over to the other corner and you will see an old-fash-
ioned gramophone with an ear-shaped bowl. Iry grabbing It  yes
its one of Titania's ears. Now look more closely at the machine 
you can record on it. If you have succeeded in solving the Music
Room puzzle, you will want to record it. Believe me, you will. So,
click the RECORD button on the gramophone , then go back to
the control panel and set the:music going. When it has finished,
check that it has recorded properly using the PLAY button. Once
you've done that, drag the recording cylinder into your Baggage.
Your very own bootleg recording of Boppy Headcase Live on the
Starship Titanic. Now all you have to do is find a use for it.
Time to visit the First Class Restaurant. Take the Pellerator  the
The Gramophone
a
Music Room seats.
First Class Restaurant

Restaurant is marked on the top right of the control panel. When you exit the Pellerator you
will find yourself in a circular Lobby. Ahead of you is a plinth. If you approach and click on it
you will see from your PET that it is the Restaurant music system. It is locked. The keyhole
looks conventional  make a note. Move round till you see a door Enter and you are in
the First Class Restaurant. On each side you will see tables  if you click on them you
will be told by the Maftre dBot that the tables are busy. Look around for the Maitre
dBot and he is not hard to find  straight down the carpet and in small pieces.
D'Astragar, as he is known to his friends, has been the victim of a rather brutal assault
but in the tradition of all great Maitre d's he is carrying on regardless. Behind him is a
table  slumped across it is the figure of Scraliontis. If you attempt to get too close
D'Astragar will warn you off. The Maftre dBot will talk to you but it is quite hard to avoid
a fight. Whether the subject is food, menus or music the Maitre dBot is vaitiry touchy 

Scraliontiss table
especially if you are persistent. There is very little you can do here that does not lead to
a fight. Once you are in a fight however, all is not lost. For the Maitre d'Bot has a weak
spot. All you have to do is listen carefully to what he says and you'll soon get to the bot-
tom of it. Failing that you could always ask another Bot  most of them are aware of his
weakness.
During the fight you'll probably pull off his arm. This can't be helped and you shouldnt
feel guilty. Inspect the arm: it appears to be holding something very tightly. Something that
you will probably want  for it looks suspiciously like a Body Part. Somehow you are going
to have to relax that grip.
Once you have defeated the Maitre dBot he will allow you to scrutinise Scraliontiss
table. When you get there you'll find it is worth the wait. The
Maitre dBot's other arm is on the table  clutching a key. Drag
the arm into your Baggage. There is also a napkin  take it. And
underneath Scraliontis's arm you'll spy a hint of bright green  bag
that too.As you are leaving the Restaurant, don't forget the Music
System  you've got a key now, albeit one with an arm attached.
In the Lobby, drag the arm clutching the key and try the music
system lock  it works. The machine opens up. But what do you
do now? Well you could try Boppys music on the Majftre dBot
Mattre dBot's arm
and see if it calms him down a
little. All you have to do is make

some space in the playing slots, put in the
music cylinder from your PET and click
the PLAY arrow in the middle.
Go back into the First Class Restaurant
and Boppy's music should be playing, It has
an
interesting effect upon the Maitre
d'Bot. It has an interesting effect upon
Baggage mode in your PET too...
You will notice that you now have a
new Fuse. Time to go back to Titania's
Chamber and
see what
it does.
In  Control Panel
Leovinuss Study, go to the Control Panel
and insert the new Green Fuse in
the slot beneath the tree icon.
Trees should be a reasonable hint
as to where to go next  time for
another boat trip.
At the Arboretum click on the
gate to reveal the garden. Now
=~
C
click on the Season Changer. You
- re
= 3 as.
will notice through the Autumnal
a
Aue!
mist an object that was hidden
under the summer foliage but ts
now grabbable. Unfortunately
if
Autumn
you try grabbing it nothing happens
 you're going to need something
to knock it down with. Check your
Baggage and you'll see you've got
just the thing.
If you've enjoyed this brief spell
in charge of the Seasons, you may
want to experiment with Winter
This won't reveal anything new in
the Arboretum but it will allow you
to solve another puzzle. Click on
the Season Changer again and
watch
as Autumn
blends
into  Winter

First Class Canal in Winter
Winter Turn round and you will see that the Canal has frozen over: if you attempt to take
a gondola you will find they're not working. However the ice has brought one benefit. Go
to the broom cupboard and turn
round so you are facing the Canal.
Ahead of you is a RowBot which is
normally unreachable. Because the
Canal has frozen you can now
walk towards him across the ice.
As you get closer you will see he
has a very large mouth. This is a
hint. If you click on the mouth
however nothing happens. You're
going to have to shut it up before
you can grab it.
This RowBot has a rather limit-
ed range. He can sing only two
arias: since his cellpoint settings are
The Singing RowBot

Spring in the Arboretum
Toscasity and Figarosity you should be able to guess where the arias come from. Unlike
the other Bots his cellpoint levers are attached to his body.
To reveal them, all you have to
do is click on his chest plate. If you try and stop him singing an aria by pulling down on
one lever however, the other lever shoots up and he sings the other aria. Somehow you
need to weigh down both levers simultaneously. For which task you will need two objects
of equal weight. Look into your Baggage and you willl find that you have already come
armed for such a job.
As soon as you have the levers under control, click on the RowBot's face again and you
will find that his mouth is now detachable  it is of course Titania's Mouth. Drag It into your
Baggage. Before you leave the Arboretum dont forget there's a season you haven't tried
yet  Spring, Click on the Seasonal Changer As Winter fades away and the trees come
into blossom you'll notice clouds of pollen floating into the breeze. Think about this. What
does pollen mean? Hay fever: Sore eyes. Sneezing. Runny noses. Noses. You haven't found
one yet. You haven't seen one yet. But maybe if you move round the ship you just might
hear one.
To save you wandering round thousands of rooms here's a genuine hint: the Parrot
Lobby. Remember the Uplighter which activated your cursor?

=
When you reach the uplighter
this time you will notice that sure
enough it's sneezing loudly. With
every sneeze something pops up
and disappears again  too quick
to drag. What if you tickle it with a
feather? No, it doesn't work. What
you need
is some
method
of
blowing the thing out. Remember
how the Mother of all Succ-U-
Buses sneezed out Brobostigon? If
only you could harness that awful
phlegmy power here. If only there
were some method of connecting
the Succ-U-Bus to the uplighter.
Some kind of pipe. Well there's a thing  look in your Baggage and see what you picked
up by the Arboretum. Yes, a Hose. Drag the Hose onto the Succ-U-Bus. A deep Succubal
instinct kicks in and the Succ-U-Bus starts to blow. Now go to the uplighter The other
end of the Hose has now appeared in your Baggage. Take this and drag it up to the
Uplighter. Wait for nature to perform a
little miracle...
While you're here in the Parrot Lobby it is worth reviewing your haul so far. As well
as some rather dubious items that you've already used, you have a Napkin and the
Hose attached to the Uplighter (1)
Hose attached to the Upligt

pathetic Head of a LiftBot.You are still not only looking for an eye
but there is the small puzzle of the shiny blue perch to solve  a
perch which is doing its best to shout BODY PART at you. By
now you will understand enough of the logic of the Starship
Titanic to realise that polishing Nobbys head with the Napkin is
unlikely to produce the Eye out of thin air. Let's deal with the
Parrot first.
What's the problem here? The Parrot won't move from the
| remember
thinking about a
puzzle which |
wanted to alter. |
thought to myself:
Well obviously, the
parrot will only eat
chicken without
tomato sauce  it
would be stupid
otherwise. These
were not the
perch long enough for you to reach in and grab it. Clearly you
need to find something to tempt him. There are no more pista-
chios. What about chicken? The Parrot likes chicken. Easy. All you
do is grab a chicken from the
SGT Restaurant, pop it in your
Baggage, take it to the Parrot. = thoughts of a
and drop it in the cage: while
normal person. *
he's tucking in you can nab the
ADAM SHAIKH,
perch and run. Just try it
PROGRAMMER
though. This Parrot likes his
chicken hot and by the time
you get it to him its cold. He won't eat it. You're going
to have to send it in the Succ-U-Bus.
Unfortunately Succ-U-Buses like chicken too and
if you send a naked chicken through the system It
ends up being eaten. So how do you stop the Succ-U-Bus gob-
bling your chicken? Cover it in something nasty. Maybe mustard
sauce will do. In the SGT Restaurant, place a chicken under the
middle tap and wait: if it won't work try it on the bottom row.
Good. Mustard appears and drenches your chicken. It also slips
off.
The chicken is too greasy. So how do you get grease off a
chicken? Wipe it. With what? Yes, you've got just the implement
and a First Class one at that. Once you've cleaned up the greasy
chicken there's nothing to stop you. Fire it off in the Succ-U-Bus
and head back to the Parrot Lobby. Retrieve the chicken and
tempt the Parrot by placing it just out of his reach. If it's still mus-
tardy though, he won't fancy it. You'll have to wipe it again. When
he's finally happy and you've got him munching, take the perch.
Chicken with Mustard Sauce

=
As soon as you have it in your Baggage
you'll see that it is in fact the Central
Core. Do the Parrot a favour before you
go  put the original perch back in the
cage when you take the Core out  if he
hasn't got anything to stand on youlll
never track him down again.
All thats left is to sort out Nobbys
head. You will by now have used Lifts 1-3
and Nobbys been all right (well relatively
of course). Lift 4 is suspiciously out of
action  so that's where you should focus
your attention. The trick here is to work
out where Lift 4 goes in relation to the
other Lifts  they all have a synchronous
mioewie micant.
Somehow
you're
going to have to
pull Lift 4 to the
Top of The Well by
taking one of the
Nobby with his Head
other Lifts down to
various
different
floors. Try taking each of the Lifts (not 4) down to the First Class
levels and then coming back up to the Top of The Well in a dif-
ferent one to see whether Lift 4 is there yet. Eventually you
should be able to work out which Lift connects with 4 allowing
you to enter it at the Top of The Well. You'll find a LiftBot with no
head but a sphere in its place. All you have to do is drag the
sphere into your Baggage then drag Nobby's head into Its place.
Nobby will be immensely relieved to be back in one piece and
you may even find this moment quaintly moving. More important
is the fact that you have now found the final Body Part.
Time to fit them all back into Titania. Go down to Titania's
Chamber and approach the head (as usual don't forget to delay
the bomb countdown en route). As you click down by her head,
Nobby without his Head

The Captain's
Pellerator
the rods will emerge. One
by one you can insert the
Brain Pieces, the Eyes, Ears,
Nose and Mouth. They
have to go in the right
order of course. Which
is?
Well that would be telling
 this is the Hints section
after
all. You'll
know
if
you've got it right because
something interesting hap-
pens. You'll know if you've
got it wrong because noth-
ing happens.
Once you have awak-
ened Titania and she has
explained the rest of the
mystery,
her
Chamber
Titania Awakened

(reating lifeboat
lf you wanted to write a computer game,
there are three ways you could do it.
The first would be to develop an
engine, the part of the program
responsible for getting the graphics onto
the screen in such a way that the
gameplayer will recognize the environment
as, say, a Starship, and not a collection of
blobs. The gameplay is then hard-coded
alongside the engine, meaning every
action and reaction in the game is
painstakingly described by specific
routines in a programming language of
your choice (or Java).
Coding commences on the
understanding that changes to gameplay
mean changes to code. Everyone agrees
to never, ever even consider changing
their mind about the plot, puzzles,
controls, storyline, graphics, music, sound
or any other part of the game, no matter
how much more fun it would be, as this
would require re-writing huge swathes of
the above-mentioned routines.
A hard-coded game can behave exactly
as described in its specification but will
take approximately (give or take six
months) forever to develop. The second,
speedier, approach is to use an off-the-
shelf authoring package. Theoretically, this
provides a ready-made engine, eliminating
the guru-factor by hiding away the
scary system components, allowing the
authors to concentrate on gameplay.
The downside is loss of flexibility -
there's always something it can't do,
forcing the game designer to compromise,
resulting in the tell-tale look of an
authored game.
Unwilling to compromise, but keen to
ship this millennium, we decided to write
our own authoring application.
The first obstacle to tackle on a major
software project is to come up with an
appropriately witty codename. Tim picked
LifeBoat appropriate for three reasons:
1) It's the obvious means of escape from
the enormity of Titanic.
2) The name lends itself to inter-capping -
the IT industry habit of putting spurious
capital letters in the middle of words.
3) The final letters are AT, allowing a
retro-fitted smartass acronym ending in
Authoring Tool, which we promptly forgot.
With the project name decided, it was
clear that additional programmers
would be needed to work on the acronym.
Tim's offer of late nights, tight deadlines
and free chilled water was pretty
convincing, so Rik  | joined TDV on the
first day of 97, ready to write an
authoring tool that would:
* Allow all authors to work simultaneously
on different areas of the game and
populate the ship with birds, Bots and
other objects.

* Generate platform-independent C++ to
wrap authors puzzle code and character
behavior.
* Plug directly into our custom-built
engine, so authors could test run the
game at the touch of a button.
* Represent the ships topology as a
graphical mesh of editable links.
"Map the GOO game views to the stills
generated by the 3D artists.
* Link 4000 view-to-view transitions
with their associated movies.
LifeBoat went live on Valentine's Day
97, and while Emma acted as project
alchermist, liaising between art and
science, and magicing assets into place,
Adam applied his unrivalled grasp of
gameplay to forge storyline into code. By
Milia the ship was navigable, and the 3D
starfield was tempting trendsetters to
trade Ray-Bans for Red/Blue anaglyphic
glasses.
Only days before, the astronomically
accurate Q1IOO-star database had been
the topic of Mike's impromptu white-
beard explanation of quaternions to
colleagues, curious to see the maths that
had driven him to wear free-in-a-box-of-
breakfast-cereal eyewear for a week.
While LifeBoat and its engine Paddle
(Pathetic Acronym Devised to Describe
LifeBoat's Engine) became more
sophisticated, the Bots vocabularies
boomed. Soon it would take not only
three CDs to contain their verbosity, but
also a veritable laboratory of language
wranglers. We soon welcomed positronic
brain programmers Jason  Richard, who
alongside cunning linguist Renata, all
appeared to use unfeasibly large plates
of bread to teach the characters to talk.
The closing stages of the project
loomed near, and we became increasingly
reliant on sophisticated compression
technology to keep within the
1.EAGigabyte data budget. MPEG-3
ensured the sixteen hours of Bot speech
would fit, and switching to Indeo for the
Top Of The Well navigation movies gave
us extra breathing space.
3D sound gave the characters more
depth, and, using the very same graphics
package that the team had written
before joining TDV, the good doctor Jack
created the class upgrades for the PET.
As the last all-night play-testing
session drew to a close, half the team
retired to the office futons, while the
dawn patrol began burning the final set
of gold CDs ready for transatlantic
courier collection. Exactly 400 days
after the first build of LifeBoat. The
programming team wishes you as many
enjoyable late nights playing Starship
Titanic as we had writing it!
Sean Selle, Covent Garden, April "98.
Oh, in case you were wondering, the third
way of writing a computer game? Fay
someone else to do it for you.

The Captain's Pellerator arrives at the Bridge
 The Bridge is based on a notion of what _
happens to captains of oil tankers. There is
actually nothing for our captain to do so an
enormous entertainment system has been
built just to keep him from going mad while
the ship steers itself across the Galaxy.
The ship completely looks after itself but there
is a big wheel so the captain can play with it.
Of course the captain isnt even there and
the ship is managing fine without him so that
was 4
little joke.
Doucias ADAMS
The Bridge

Navigator Position
seals and you no longer have access to the
rest of the Ship. The mysterious third exit
(which up until now has been locked) swings
open
and you find yourself facing the
Captain's Pellerator Into the Pellerator, and
you are swept majestically towards the
Bridge.
The Bridge may not be what you were
expecting. There's not a great deal to do here
 because the Captain doesnt do a great deal
himself. You can play with the wheel a bit.
Listen to the seagulls. Look at the stars. On
one side there's a small entertainment centre
 but the Captain's not here so you can't
operate it. On the far side is the Navigator's
Position. This should be of more interest to
you. Because
now you've repaired the
Starship Titanic there's one thing left to do: go

Picture of The Night Sky
home. You don't know where earth is 
but thats the least of your problems. You
dont even know where you are. So how
are
you
going to
get home?
Easy.
Remember you looked in your Baggage a
while back to see what you hadn't used?
At the beginning of your journey you
3D Visor

picked up a Picture of the Night Sky above your house  a unique record of your home
in relation to the stars of your galaxy. You're going to use this to pinpoint your home in
Space  set the Starship Titanic navigation system, and return home.
Go down to the Navigator's Position and click on the helmet in Remote Thingummy.
From now on you are on your own. You are going for a trip in a virtual starfield, look-
ing for the stars that light your own particular corner of the galaxy. If you've got this far
you don't really need hints. You do need your 3D glasses. In fact you need to think in
threes. How else can you triangulate if you don't think in threes?
By the way. Did you remember to re-set the bomb countdown before you left
Titania's Chamber? If you didn't, then you'd better not take too long figuring this out.
Telielielatiniia)
PT
ledielinliedielelie,
21 PLL DALAL
AL OAL AD
Don't forget the Bomb...

WARNING
The following pages contain all the information
necessary to ruin. your enjoyment of Starship
Titanic. If you're reading this by chance and you
don't want to know the solutions there Is still time:
go to a different chapter now. Don't leave It too
late. We'll let you reach the end of this paragraph safely but only
because we're assuming you're here by mistake.
Still reading? Well, you've been warned. You're here because you
want to be, aren't you? Because you want the shortcuts. You want
things the easy way, the way that doesn't involve hard work.
You're a slacker, aren't you? A good-for-nothing sluggard.
An idling,
slouching, parasitical bum. It doesnt matter to you that tens,
hundreds  no thousands of people have spent millions of man
and woman hours painstakingly crafting this fine and complex
game. Oh no. You're happy to ride rough-shod over their feelings.
You spit on their dedication. Never mind the passion, the
commitment, the sacrifices they made to ensure the puzzles
worked. You don't give a damn.
It's just a game to you, isn't It?
_ oe

ST
A RES
he
Pe
TANIC)/
SOLUTIONS
Getting Started... /08
Getting the Speech Centre..
Getting Second Class Upgrade... 1/0
Getting the Vision Centre..
Getting First Class Upgrade...
12
Getting the Fuses... / 42
Getting the Central Core... 1/4
Getting the Long Stick... 146
Getting Ear |...1 18
Getting the E-mail Passwords...
Getting Ear 2...1 20
Getting the Auditory Centre..
Getting Eye |.../22
Defusing the Bomb... /56
Getting Eye 2....124
Waking Titania... /58
Getting the Mouth... /26
Getting Home... /60
Getting the Nose... /28
Icon Key... 166
Getting the Olfactory Centre .../32
Cellpoints.../68

(letting Started
By all means wander around Your Lovely
Home fiddling with anything that isn't
nailed down. There are only two
important objects in here: the computer
and the picture of the night sky.
Embarkation Lobby
Service Elevator
My Lovely Home
A A
rh
Pn
Go to the computer. Click on its CD drawer. It will
Now drag the Starship Titanic CD which is on the
open.
desk into the computer. The CD drawer closes.
The game starts. The Starship Titanic crashes into
Your Lovely Home.
When the Doorbot appears, answer his questions
and do what he asks. For PET information see p 18.

ihe | ringer Ft
Ch lack things se ge
Cen you help me?
Eder
If you do not drag the Picture of the Night Sky
Follow the DoorBot into the Service Elevator.
into your PET he will do it for you.
Press the top button when the Doorbot asks you
to. Listen very carefully to what he says.
saad
2
Aly here
Titiinkwole about
Basia
ta
bece ge
Go to the plinth and press the button. Enjoy the
lovely credits.
When you arrive back in the Embarkation Lobby
The DeskBot will appear and take you through the
it is now lit. Go to the desk and click on the bell:
check-in procedure.
You will be allocated a room
in Super Galactic Traveller Class. When she is
through she will close up. You are now officially

Getting Second (lass Upgrade
Object required: In-Flight Magazine.
Whilst on the Starship Titanic, it is very
important that you obey your primaeval
upgrade urges.
Embarkation Lobby
SGT Stateroom
Go to your Super Galactic Traveller
Class Stateroom (see Hints page 62
if you cannot find your room). The
furniture is now visible in your PET
as icons. Scroll left or right to view.
Click on the furniture in the PET
and then click the button on the
right to activate.
|. Open washstand.
2. Open desk.
3. Open chest of drawers.

your room. Use your PET to get the Succ-U-Bus
to deliver your lucky In-Flight Magazine.
Go to the Succ-U-Bus in the SGT Lobby outside
6. Click on bed to get close
to TV.
Select the TV in Remote Thingummy mode in your
PET then use the controls to turn it on and
change the channel to Channel 3. Listen to the
instructions.
Go to the DeskBot. Tell her you have won the
upgrade competition and give her the In-Flight
Magazine from your PET. She will upgrade you and
your new room will be visible in your PET.

(letting First (lass Upgrade
Getting a First Class Upgrade is simple.
Embarkation Lobby
Sculpture Chamber
All you have to do is ask the
DeskBot. The trouble is, she'll
only give you an upgrade
when her cellpoints are at their
optimum Gossipy and Sweet settings.
This may happen at random during the game.
It's simpler however to go and change them by pulling the levers on her statue in the
Sculpture Chamber Once you have a First Class Upgrade all relevant areas of the ship
are open to you. In theory there is nothing to stop you completing the remaining
puzzles. In theory.
Go to the Sculpture Chamber

we go again! Hit something
aise now have:
got no brain!
g
~.
There is ino one here to talkto
Cheeriby, then buster, Missin
we go again! HX something else now.
{gat no braint
~
There is no one here to talk 1
Choeribyo, then buster.
Activate both levers once: this triggers her
optimum cellpoint settings.
Go directly to the Embarkation Lobby. Don't
dawdle or her cellpoints may change again.
Ask the DeskBot to upgrade you to First Class.
She will. Your new First Class Room will appear as
a chevron in your PET.

First Class
(letting the Central Core
ia
Titania's Chamber
Other objects required: Napkin; Hot Chicken.
You must have First Class access to solve this puzzle. If you
are not yet upgraded, see Getting Second Class Upgrade
(page | 10) and Getting First Class Upgrade (page |
| 2).
SGT Restaurant
Go to the Parrot
Lobby. In Remote
Thingummy mode,
drag the Parrot
Lobby room
chevron into a
box in your PET
to save.
Go to Leovinus's room in Titania's Chamber. (If
Locate the Control Panel. Open it.
you're not sure how to get there see page 57
Hints).

Var fae ls
Us
Switch the yellow Chicken lever to slow, as shown.
Go to the First Class Restaurant.
Remove the Yellow Fuse.
Poke the Maitre dBot on the buttocks until he
says Enfin... Enough etc.
Drag the Napkin from the table into
your Baggage.

pets
Lh A LRU
Grab the Napkin with your cursor and wipe the
Put the Chicken in a box on the bottom row, 3rd
grease from the Chicken.
column from the left. Mustard sauce will now
squirt out and stick to the Chicken. Put the
Chicken in your baggage.
Go to the Succ-U-Bus in the SGT Lobby.
With your PET in Remote Thingummy
mode, send the mustardy Chicken to the
Parrot Room.

Return to the Parrot Lobby.
If you do not already have it, take the Perch from
the cement bags.
Drag the Chicken to the left-hand side of the
Parrot Cage. The Parrot will start to eat the
Chicken.
Remove the Chicken from the Succ-U-Bus and
wipe the Mustard off with the Napkin.
Grab the Central Core (masquerading as a perch)
and place it in your Baggage. Replace it with the
real Perch to stop the Parrot flying away.

Cetting Ear |
Second Class
Stateroom
If you have not yet been upgraded see Getting
Second Class Upgrade (page | | 0).
Go to the Parrot Lobby.
Grab the Parrot and drag him into your PET.
Go directly to the Succ-U-Bus and drag the Parrot
into the tray. Using the icon address in your PET
send the Parrot to your Second Class Stateroom.

Go to your Second Class Stateroom.
a
=
Ps
eon Cees
Let the Parrot out of the Succ-U-Bus by pressing
Go and rustle the bowl of pistachios with your
RECEIVE.
cursor

This will cause the Parrot to fly to the bowl and
The empty bowl is Ear |. Unscrew it and drag it
eat all the nuts.
into your Baggage.

Music Room
(letting far 2
Boppy Headcase and His Laidback Loafers can all be
controlled from the conductor stand in the middle of the
room. You can create an infinite number of awful tunes by
manipulating the switches. There is only one correct
version.
Go to the Music Room.
This is what all the knobs, sliders and
switches actually do:
Inversion
Pitch
On/Off
Direction

If you want to do It the easy way,
here's how:
Go to the red chairs and note the pattern on
the seat.
no Ra ae
Go to the conductor stand and
press the red button to turn on
the music. Move the levers until
the pattern matches the
pattern on the seat. The music
is now exactly as Boppy
intended.
Ey
PE
ate a
Go to the gramophone in the far corner of the
Pick up Ear 2 from the Gramophone.
Music Room and press RECORD (circle). You have
recorded the music.

Titania's Chamber
First Class
Stateroom
You must have First Class access to solve this puzzle.
If you are not yet upgraded, see Getting Second Class
Upgrade (pagel 10) and Getting First Class Upgrade
(page| | 2).
Go to any First Class Stateroom.
Turn on the TV and go to Channel 4.
Note the chevron pattern on the screen
(beware, the chevron is upside down).

Evie es Ge ey
abt Mallee Lada oe
Select Designer Room Numbers mode in your
Your PET will now tell you the room code for the
PET. Hold down the SHIFT key and click on the
chevron you have created.
lines of the Current Location until the pattern
matches that on the screen. Save this code.
Go to the room indicated.
Go to Remote Thingummy mode in your PET.
Toggle the light switches until you can see the light
which is not working. This is Eye |.
Summon the BellBot. Ask him to get the top left
light. Eye | will appear in your Baggage.

e
a
Cetting Eye 2
bapa a
GE
ey Paap EE
Top of The Well
Eye 2 has been unpleasantly inserted into Nobby's
head-space in the faulty Lift 4. Nobbys head itself has
been discarded at The Bottom of The Well. In order to
access Lift 4 you need to position the other Lifts in the
correct sequence  the movement of the Lifts is synchronous.
You don't actually need to put Nobby's head back. We'd just
rather you did.
Bottom of The Well
Parrot
Lobby
Creators
Chamber
Embarkation
Lobby
Sculpture
Chamber
Enter any Lift apart from Lift 4.

Go to The Bottom of The Well.
Return to The Top of The Well and enter
Lift 2, Descend to any First Class Floor.
Exit and enter Lift |. Go back to The Top
of The Well.
Now enter Lift 4 (the faulty one). Remove Eye 2
which is masquerading as the LiftBot's head and
place it in your Baggage. Drag the LiftBot's spare
head from your Baggage and put it in place of
Eye 2.
Lift 4 will now function.

=
Titania's Chamber
Getting the Pout
cept
Arboretum
Other objects required: Green Fuse; Maitre dBots
arms with empty hands.
You must have First Class access to solve this puzzle. If you
are not yet upgraded, see Getting Second Class Upgrade
(page 110) and Getting First Class Upgrade (page| | 2).
Go to the Grand Axial Canal First Class.
If the Canal is not frozen, go to Leovinus's room in
Titania's Chamber.
On
et er
eee ela)
Open up the Control Panel in the alcove.
If you have the Green Fuse in your Baggage, insert
it under the Arboretum (tree) icon and turn the
switch to the right as shown. If you do not have
the Fuse see Getting the Fuses (page| 42).

Go to the Arboretum.
CO
a cnn or ncn ame
Set the Seasonal Adjustment lever to Winter:
Go back to the Grand Canal First Class. Locate
the broom closet, then approach the singing
RowBot directly. (This is the only route which will
allow you
to get close to the RowBot.)
Open the RowBot's chest by clicking on the chest
Drag the Mouth into your Baggage.
plate. Take both of the Maftre dBot's arms from
your Baggage and hang one on each of the
RowBot's levers. His Mouth will become detached.
If you do not have the Maitre dBot's arms see
- Getting the Auditory Centre (page!52).

Titania's Chamber
Getting the Hose
cepted
Arboretum
Parrot Lobby
Other objects required: Green Fuse; Hose.
You must have First Class access to solve this puzzle.
If you are not yet upgraded, see Getting Second Class
Upgrade (page | 10) and Getting First Class Upgrade
(page
12).
Bilge Room
Go to the Arboretum.

:
T
rey
lentes
oy
Go to the Broom Cupboard and drag
At the Arboretum, locate the Seasonal Adjustment
the Hose into your Baggage.
switches. Change the setting to Spring.
If the Season does not change:
Go to Leovinus's room in Titania's
Chamber.
Open up the Control Panel in the alcove.
If you have the Green Fuse in your Baggage, insert
it under the Arboretum (tree) icon and turn the
switch to the right as shown. If you do not have
the Fuse see Getting the Fuses (page! 42).

Return to the Arboretum and change the setting.
A cloud of pollen will be released.
iret)
Lae acd
Go to the Parrot Lobby.
The Nose can now be heard sneezing, concealed
in an Uplighter.

Take the Hose from your Baggage, drag
it to the Succ-U-Bus and attach.
Attach the other end of the Hose to
the sneezing Uplighter.
The Nose will be blown in the air and
will land on the rim of the Uplighter.
Drag it into your Baggage.

Getting the Olfactory Centre
Parrot Lobby
The Olfactory Centre is concealed in the pocket
of Brobostigon,
the Project Manager. Brobostigon
is concealed in the Mother of all Succ-U-Buses
in the Bilge Room.
Bilge Room
Go to the Parrot Lobby.
Drag the Parrot into your PET. After a short delay
he will escape leaving behind a feather in your
Baggage.

Go to the Bilge Room. Turn on the
Succ-U-Bus.
eye bee a di
Drag the feather from your Baggage onto the
The Project Manager, Brobostigon, will be ejected
Succ-U-Bus tray, press SEND and stand well back.
from the Succ-U-Bus.
Go to the body of Brobostigon and click
on it drag the Olfactory Centre from his
pocket and into your Baggage.

Grand Axial Canal
Getting the Speech Centre
ees
Titania's Chamber
Arboretum
Objects required: Long Stick
You must have First Class access to solve this puzzle. If you
are not yet upgraded, see Getting Second Class Upgrade
(page | 10) and Getting First Class Upgrade (page | | 2).
Go to the Arboretum.
Tha ites
ThE
iii
Locate the Seasonal Adjustment switches. Change
the setting to Autumn.

If the Season does not change:
Go to Leovinuss room in Titania's
Chamber.
Cry
Open up the Control Panel in the alcove.
Go back to the Arboretum and change the setting.
The Speech Centre will now be visible in a tree.
Using your Long Stick, knock the Speech Centre
out of the tree and drag it into your Baggage. If
you do not have a Long Stick, see Getting the
Long Stick (page| 46).
If you have the Green Fuse in your Baggage, insert
it under the Arboretum (tree) icon and turn the
switch to the right as shown. If you do not have
the Fuse see Getting the Fuses (page! 42).

Ee
Getting the Vision Centre
Objects required: Long Stick; Blue Fuse; Hot
Chicken.
This is a three-part puzzle requiring access to First and
Second Class Areas. If you are not yet upgraded, see Getting
Second Class Upgrade (page | 10) and Getting First Class
Upgrade (page | | 2).

Grand Axial Canal
Titania's Chamber
First Class
Promenade Deck
Arboretum
Parrot Lobby
SGT Restaurant
Bottom of The Well
The Vision Centre is concealed behind the Bar. The BarBot is unable to hand it to you
however until you have helped him. He is trapped in a Cocktail-Making Loop
attempting to put together a Titanic Titillator, the vital ingredients of which are: a
Lemon, a Pured Flock of Starlings, and a Crushed Television. Your task is to find these.
The BarBot himself will add the final ingredient  Signurian Vodka.
THE LEMON
Go to the Bar.
Ring the bell on the Bar by clicking on it. The
BarBot will appear and give you a glass. Drag it
into your Baggage.

ae eceres ee ee
vere
Go to the Arboretum. Ensure the Season is set to Summer If it is not, only you can have changed it so
you will know what to do.
Using the Long Stick from
your Baggage, knock the
Lemon off the tree. If you
do not have a Long Stick
see Getting Long Stick
page |46. Drag the Lemon
into your Baggage.

THE PUREED FLOCK OF STARLINGS
Go to the Promenade Deck.
Go to the fan switch and press the ON button
If this does not function, go to Leovinus's room in
once,
Titania's Chamber.

If you have the Blue Fuse in your Baggage, insert it
under the Promenade Deck (fan) icon and turn
the blue knob to the right. If you do not have the
Blue Fuse see Getting the Fuses (page |42).
Check that the yellow knob is also turned to the
Go back to the Promenade Deck. Press the ON
right as shown. Remove the Yellow Fuse under the
button once. Press the SPEED button twice.
Chicken icon and place it in your Baggage.
Watch the starlings being pured.

Go to the Super Galactic
Traveller Class Restaurant.
Pull the Chicken Machine lever. Catch the Chicken.
Place the Chicken in the position shown under the
(To catch the Chicken see Getting the Central
bird sauce dispenser. Purple Pured Starling Sauce
Core page | |4).
will spray out.
Quickly drag the Glass from your Baggage and
place it under the Chicken. Pured Flock of
Starlings will now slide off the slippy Chicken and
into the Glass. Drag it into your Baggage.

CRUSHED TELEVISION SET
Go to the Parrot Room. Summon the BellBot. Tell
Enter any Lift and go to The Bottom of The Well.
the BellBot to pick up the television and take it to
Drag the broken pieces of the television into your
The Top of The Well.
At The Top of Well, tell the
Baggage.
BellBot to throw the television off.
ON COMPLETION OF ALL THE ABOVE
Baggage to the BarBot. The BarBot will ask What's
this? You must reply Pured Starling or
something similar: Ask the BarBot for the vodka.
Ask the BarBot for the Vision Centre and he will
Drag it into your Baggage.
get it for you.

First Class
Restaurant
Getting the fuses
Parrot Lobby
The Fuses belong in the control panel in Titania's
Chamber. They were removed by Scraliontis and
Brobostigon.
Bilge Room
FUSE | (GREEN)
Go to the First Class Restaurant. If you
are not yet upgraded, see Getting
Second Class Upgrade (page | 10) and
Getting First Class Upgrade (page | | 2).
Start a fight with the Maitre dBot.
Defeat the Maitre dBot by wounding
him in the bottom. (He will say Enfin,
enough etc.)

Go to the table where the body of
Scraliontis is slumped. Drag the Green
Fuse from under his hand into your
Baggage.
Pe Cena ase eh
FUSE 2 (BLUE)
Go to the Parrot Lobby.

Drag the Parrot into your PET. When he
escapes, a feather remains in the
Baggage.
Go to the Bilge Room.
Turn on the Succ-U-Bus. Drag the
feather from your Baggage onto the
Succ-U-Bus tray, press DELIVER and
stand well back.

The Project Manager, Brobostigon, will be
ejected from the Succ-U-Bus. Click on
his body twice where your cursor turns
into a magnifying glass.
Peete mC ts
The Blue Fuse will now appear in your
Baggage.

Promenade Deck
Getting the Long Stick
You must have First Class access to solve this puzzle.
If you are not yet upgraded, see Getting Second
Class Upgrade (page | 10) and Getting First Class
Upgrade (page | | 2).
SGT Lounge
Go to the Parrot Lobby.
Locate the Perch and drag it into your Baggage.
Go to the Promenade Deck.

Locate the Hammer Dispenser. Use the spare
Perch to hit the blue button on the Hammer
Dispenser.
Go to any Super Galactic Traveller Class Lounge.
Take the Hammer from your Baggage and use it
Locate the Long Stick Dispenser.
to smash the glass on the Dispenser.
_Drag the Long Stick into your Baggage.

Getting the Email Fasswords
Titania's Chamber
Creators Chamber
If you are not yet upgraded, see Getting Second
Class Upgrade (page| | 0).
Go to Leovinus's room in Titania's
Chamber.
Open up the Control Panel.

Beside the red icon is a red switch. Turn
rt thus:
DO NOT TOUCH THE RED FUSE!
Pees
e he SRG ce etd
Go to the Creators Chamber.
Pull the lever by the door. This switches
off the beam.
Sayed Chevron: the Creators Chember

Stand on each of the
remains of the busts and
read the passwords which
are:
THIS
THAT
OTHER

Go back to Titania's
Chamber and go into
Leovinuss study.
Zoom in on the desk. Log
in as one of the Creators:
Scraliontis  THIS
Brobostigon  THAT
Leovinus  OTHER
You will now be able to
read their mail.
REV tee Ols asst :
Bic stm Rats tra
Toler

Music Room
Getting the Auditory Centr
on
To complete this puzzle you need First and Second
Class access. If you are not yet upgraded, see Getting
Second Class Upgrade (page | 10) and Getting First Class
Upgrade (page |12).You also need to have solved the Music
puzzle, see Getting Ear 2 (page | 20).
Ge to the Music Ronny
Drag the Music Cylinder with the correct
recording into your Baggage.

Go to the First Class Restaurant.
Engage the Maftre dBot in a fight. One
of his arms will appear clutching the
Auditory Centre. Drag it into your
Baggage. Defeat the Maftre dBot by
wounding him in the bottom. (You will
hear him say Enfin, enough etc.)
Go to the table where the body of
Scraliontis is slumped. The Maitre dBot's
other arm is on the table, a key in its
hand. Drag the arm (with key) into your
Baggage.

Go to the Lobby outside the First Class
Restaurant and locate the Music System.
Unlock the cover of the Music System
using the arm (with the key) from your
Baggage.
Drag out the old Music Cylinder and put
it in the right hand slot.

Drag the Music Cylinder from your
Baggage into the centre slot.
Press PLAY. You will hear your recording
of Boppy and His Laidback Loafers.
Go back to the First Class Restaurant
The new music will make the Maitre
dBot relax. The Auditory Centre will be
released from the hand and will appear
in your Baggage.

Titania's Chamber
Defusing the Bomb
If you have pressed the DISARM BOMB button
in Titania's Chamber then you will know that this
button actually arms the bomb. You will
therefore need to disarm it. This is simple.
Go to the Bomb Area in Titania's Chamber

bodied shod oso dip,
Lo diodio
densidad,
)
Pa
eee

Titania's Chamber
Waking Titania
When you have solved all the puzzles on
the Starship Titanic you will have all the objects
necessary to restore Titania to life.
Go to Titania's Chamber
Go to Titania's head and click on it.

Nose
Centres
Speech
Olfactory
Auditory
Vision
Titania will now wake and speak to you.
Oh yes. And there is one more puzzle to come...

Titania's Chamber
Cetting flome
Bridge
Other objects required: Picture of the Night Sky.
When you have successfully woken Titania the doors to
her Chamber will seal and you will not be able to return to
the rest of the ship. You will however now be able to access
the Bridge for the first time.
In Titania's Chamber, go through the glass
doors which until now have been closed.
Climb aboard the Captain's Pellerator.

Go down the steps and face the Navigator's
Take your Picture of the Night Sky from your
helmet and table.
Baggage and place it in the slot in the table. It
will be scanned. If you have lost your Picture of
the Night Sky, see Lost and Found (page 167).
Go to Remote Thingummy mode in
your PET. Select the Navigator helmet.
The helmet will come forward and
drop down over your head.

You are now looking at a 3D virtual star system.
Put on the 3D glasses to view it correctly in 3D.
Using this star system in conjunction with the Picture of the Night Sky taken
from above your house, you will be able to navigate back to Earth. The
principle is simple. If you can find a view of the stars in the virtual starfield
which exactly corresponds to the view of the stars in your Picture then you
will have found the location of your Lovely Home. All you have to do is lock
onto that view, go to the Steering Wheel, click GO and you will be taken
home.
First get used to virtual navigation.
As you move the cursor outside the central
box, the starfield will rotate. Click on any star in the Virtual View and you will
appear to fly towards it. The Starship of course will remain stationary until you
complete the navigation and actually instruct her to move.

You can toggle between the
3D Virtual View and the
Photo View by pressing the
<return> key.
S
a
a
e
Sita
as
csirccpnieiaaesmsaiaccmtecaniiammmeacseammaeabiiacccancumiaaissaiamas RRR
eee en ne een nee
*
Select a star in the Photo View and click on it.The same star will be
highlighted in the Virtual View. Go to Virtual View and look for it. As you
approach it, a tractor beam will appear and join the virtual star to the one in
your Picture. One of the starfield LED indicators will also flash. Click on the
LED to lock the two stars together.

Now repeat the process with two more stars until you have triangulated your position.
As you complete the alignment of the third star
you will find the Picture and the starfield align
perfectly.

Press SET DESTINATION.
The engines
will start and tick over.
Now click on the helmet icon in Remote
Thingummy mode. The helmet will
withdraw.
Go up the steps to the Steering Wheel.
Click the GO button. The engines will
rev up.
Se
See
es oeeame eam

cons Key
Centres: Olfactory
(yellow), Speech
(red), Vision (blue),
Auditory (green).
Nose.
Chicken with sauce:
tomato, mustard,
starling.
Lemon.
Central Core.
Mouth.
Hose.
Feather
Chicken greasy.
Hose end.
Fuse: blue, green, red,
yellow.
Eye.
ae
Glass with tomato
sauce; mustard sauce;
starling pure.

Hammer.
Magazine.
Long Stick.
Maitre d'Bot: right arm.
Maitre dBot: left arm
Napkin.
-
Parrot
with key.
Perch.
Phonograph cylinder.
Picture of night sky.
LOST AND FOUND
If you have sent something through the Succ-U-Bus system but lost it, there is a fail-
safe. Go to the Control Panel in Leovinus's Study. Turn the Succ-U-Bus switch to the
right. Now go to the Bomb Room. Activate the Succ-U-Bus. Click RECEIVE. Your lost
object will be delivered.

(ellpoints
To change a Bot's cellpoint settings, locate the appropriate statue in the Sculpture
Chamber and pull once on each lever: For all Bots the cellpoint setting is High when
the needle in the PET points up and Low when the needle points down. In all cases:
Setting | is the top dial in the PET
Setting 2 is the middle dial in the PET
Setting 3 is the bottom dial in the PET
BarBot
Ability to Come to
the Point. (Bottom
Charm. (Top dial).
Honesty. (Middle dial).
BellBot
K
i
5

Helpfulness. (Top dial).
_
Just Passing Through.
(Middle dial).

DeskBot
Gossipiness. (Top dial).
Niceness. (Middle dial).
DoorBot
Optimism. (Top dial).
Memoriousness.
(Middle dial).
LiftBot
Garrulity. (Middle dial).
Health. (Top dial).

Index
Numbers in bold refer to
illustrations
3D glasses, 105, 162
Adams, Douglas:
Introduction, 7-8
on bringing the Bots to life, 70
on location for Titania, 56
on Second Class travel, 75
on SGT Staterooms, 64
on Starship Titanic, 43
on the Bridge, 102
on The Embarkation Lobby, 49
on the interior of Starship Titanic,
5c
on the Mother Of All Succ-U-
Buses, 66
on the Music Room, 87
on the origins of Starship Titanic, 5 |
on the Titanic universe, 25
on Your Lovely Home, 44
animators, the, 60-|
Arboretum, 127, 128, 134, 135,
137
approach to, 84
in Autumn, 93, 93
in Spring, 95, 95
in Summer, 84, 84
in Winter, 93, 94
on plan, 126, 128, 134, 136
(tree) icon, 126, 129, 135
Attard, John, 61
Auditory Centre, Getting the, 152-5
Bar, 136, 141
introducing, 77-8
on plan, 136
BarBot, 8, 34-5, 136, 141
and the Vision Centre, | 36
introducing, 78
BellBot, 30-|, 50, 123
in Destructive Mood, 81
in the Parrot Lobby, 141
introducing, 50
Best, Gillian, 61
Bilge Room, 133, 144
introducing, 66
on plan, 128, 132, 142
blue perch, obtaining, 97-8
Boa, Quint, 88
Bomb Area, 156
bomb, 58
countdown, delaying, 74, 98
disarming, 59, 156-7
Boolean cube, decoding, 69
Boppy Headcase and His Laidback
Loafers, 86, 120, 155 .
Bots:
giving an item to, 20
bringing to life, 70-3
customising, 49-50
how function, 49-50
introducing the, 24-4
summoning, 20
talking to, 19, 20
Bottom of The Well, 76, 125
introducing, 56, 76
on plan, 124, 136
bowl of pistachios, 119
emptying, 75-6
Bridge, 102, 160, 161
Brobostigon, Antar Galoot, 67, 69,
Vana
life of 15-16
in Bilge Room, 145
introducing, 67
the Project Manager, 132, 133
Brobostigon, Crossa, |6
Broom Cupboard, 85
Browse, Tim, | |
Bugle,
9, 13-17
Captain's Pellerator, 99, 160
arrives at the Bridge, 102
introducing, 103
Cellpoints, | 68-9
Central Core, 117
Getting the, the solution, | 14-17
Chat-O-Mat mode, 20, 51
chevrons:
for controlling an object's
destination, 22
on TV, 122-3
understanding, 56
Chichoni, Oscar 61
Chicken icon, 139
Chicken lever, 115, 116, 140
Chicken with Mustard Sauce, 97
Chicken with pure, 80
Cocktail-Making Loop, !36
Control Panel in study, 58, 74, 74,
114, 126, 129, 135, 139, 148
introducing, 58
control panel, for Music Room, 86-7,
120
conversation, reviewing, 20
Creators' Chamber, 69, 149, 150
on plan, 148
introducing, 69
Crowley, Dermot, 88
crushed TV:
crushing, |41
obtaining, 81
D'Astragar, D'Astragar (D'Astragaar),
see Maitre d'Bot
Daytime Television, 45
Defusing the Bomb, the solution,
156-7
Designer Room Numbers mode, 22,
50, 50, 52

DeskBot, 28-9
and upgrading to First Class 113
and upgrading to Second Class I 11
folding into desk, 50
for upgrading, 65, 81
introducing, 49, 49
sleeping, 47
DoorBot, 26-7, 108
arriving 46
introducing, 46-7
Doyle, Bernie, 61
Drewbish, Marsinta, see Marsinta
Ears, 90, 90, 75-6
Getting Ear |, the solution, 118-19
Getting Ear 2, the solution, |20-|
Earth, navigating back to, |62
E-mail Passwords, Getting the, the
solution, 148-5 |
Embarkation Lobby, 109, 113
geography of, 5|
introducing, 47, 48, 49
on plan, 108, 110, 112
exit function, 23
Eyes, 83
Getting Eye |, the solution, |22-3
Getting Eye 2, the solution, 124-5
inserting, 99
fan switch, 138
feather, Parrot's, 55
Fentible, Edmund Lucy, 26-7, 46-7
First Class:
Lobby, 82
introducing, 82
Grand Axial Canal, 52, 83
in Winter, 94
introducing, 53
In-flight Magazine, 44
detailed plans in, 53
_ Restaurant Lobby, 154
Restaurant, 86, 91, 115, 153, 155
introducing, 90-2
on plan, 114, 142, 152
Stateroom, 56, 82, 122
introducing, 82
on plan, 122
Upgrade, Getting, the solution, 81-2,
112-13
Fortillian 34-5, 77
mixing a Titanic Titillator, 85, 86
furniture:
opening up in SGT Stateroom, 65
re-arranging, 19
fuse | (green), getting, 142-3
fuse 2 (blue), getting, 143-5
Fuses, Getting the, the solution, 142-5
game, starting, 44
games:
revealing a saved, 23
saving up to six, 23
getting started, 44
the solution, 108-9
gondola, 83, 83
gramophone, 90, 121
Grand Axial Canals:
First Class, 52, 83, 126, 127
on plan, 126, 128, 134, 136
in Winter, 94
introducing, 53
Second Class, 67
introducing, 59
Grand Ballroom, introducing, 54
Green Fuse, inserting, 93
Hammer Dispenser, 79, 79, 147
Hammer 147
getting hold of, 79
Headcase, Boppy, and his Laidback
Loafers, 86, 120, 155
hidden objects, 45
Hints, 9, 42-105
Home, Getting, the solution, 160-5
Hose:
attached to the Succ-U-Bus, 96
attached to Uplighter 96
using, 96-7
icons, 58
Icons Key, |66-7
identification cards for Bots, 26-39
Jones, Terry, 88
Koyotoaal IV, Krage, 30-|
introducing, 50, 5|
Kydd, Jonathan, 88
Lefkow, Laurel, 88
lemon, obtaining, 81-4
Leovinus, Leovinus, 69, 69, 74
life of, 14-15
desk, 58
room in Titania's Chamber, 114,
126, 129, 135, 138, 148
LifeBoat, creating, |00-|
lift, calling, 19
LiftBot, 32-3
Lifts, 62
| and 2, introducing, 59
controlling, 2|
using, 62
light switches, toggling, 83
load function, 23
Lobbies:
Second Class, 74
introducing, 74
SGT, 62
Long Stick, 135, 137, 147
Dispenser, 63, 147
Getting the, the solution, 146-7
obtaining, 63-4
Lounge, SGT, 63
introducing, 63

Maitre d'Bot, 36-7,91, 115
animating, 6|
arm of, 153
in First Class Restaurant, 142, 153
introducing, 9 |
relaxed, 155
arms of, 92, 92, 127
Marsinta, 28-9, 65
Cellpoints, 81, 169
introducing, 49, 49
Meier, Richard, 61
Mental Ray, 60
Millican, Richard, 7|
mini-elevators, using, 64
Missiv-O-Mat mail system:
finding passwords, 74
introducing, 58
Molina, Isabel, 61, 77
Mother Of All Succ-U-Buses, 66
introducing, 66-7
mouse, using, 44
Mouth, Getting the, the solution, | 26-7
Music Cylinder, 152, 154, 155
Music Room, 77, 86, 120, 152
introducing, 86-7, 90
on plan, 120, 152
Music System, 154
music, making, | 20-1
Napkin, 115, 116
navigation techniques, 44
Navigator Position, 103
introducing, |03
Navigator's helmet and table, 161
Nib, 78
Night Sky, 109
Picture of 161
Nobbington-Froat, G (see Nobby)
Nobby, 32-3, 62, | 24
with his Head, 98
without his Head, 98
switching his Head, 98
Nose, 130
Getting the, the solution, 128-31
objects:
picking up, 20
sending round ship, 52-3
Olfactory Centre:
Getting the, the solution, 132-3
introducing, 67
positioning on Titania's Head, 74
Parrot, 40-|, 118, 119
as dispenser of clues, 55
getting rid of 55
in a flap, 55
Parrot Cage, 117
Parrot Lobby, 54, 117, 118, 130,
132, 143, 146
introducing, 54
on plan, 114, 128, #82, 136, 142,
146
sending object to, 56
summoning. BellBot to, 141,
view from The Parrot, 54
Pellerator:
approaching, 59
as Second Class traveller, 77
control panel, 59, 59
controlling, 21
introducing, 59
Perch, 146
gathering into baggage, 55
parrot's, 54
Personal Baggage mode, 20, 51, 52
Personal Electronic Thing, see PET
PET
dragging items out of, 20
functions, 51-2
practising with, 52
receiving your 47
using the |8-23
Picture of the Night Sky, 104, 105
/
collecting, 47
Plinth, 48
Pope, Phil, 88
Promenade Deck, 78-9, 79, 138,
146
(fan) icon, 139
on plan, 136, 146
pured flock of starlings, pureeing,
| 38-40
obtaining, 78-80
spraying out, 140
Real Life mode, 23, 52
Remote Thingummy mode, 21, 52
Restaurant at the End of The Universe,
70
Restaurant, First Class, 86, 91
introducing, 90-2
Restaurant, SGT, 63, 80, 140
introducing, 63
rooms visited, creating a library of, 22
RowBot:
in Grand Axial Canal First Class,127
Singing, 94, 94-5
save function, 23
Schank, Dr Roger, 7 |
Scraliontis slumped body, 115, 143,
153
Scraliontis, Droot, 69, 74, 142
life of, 16
in First Class Restaurant, 9 |
table of, 92, 92
Sculpture Chamber, 68, 112
creating, 61
introducing, 68
on plan, | 12
Season Changer 93
Seasonal Adjustment lever, 127, 129,
134
seasonal adjustments in arboretum,
84

Second Class:
Grand Axial Canal, 67
introducing, 59
Lobby, 74
introducing, 74
Stateroom, 56, 75, 119
introducing, 75
on plan, | 18
Upgrade, Getting, the solution, ! 10-1 |
Service Elevator, 109
entrance to, 5|
to Bilge Room, 66
using, 47
on plan, |08
service records for Bots, 26-39
SGT Class, 44, 109
Lobby, 62, 111, 116
introducing, 63
Lounge, 147
on plan, 146
Restaurant, 63, 80, 115
introducing, 63
on plan 114, 136
Stateroom, 56, 64, 110
introducing, 64-5
on plan, | 10
Shaikh, Adam, 97
Signurian Vodka, obtaining a slug of,
85
Softimage, 60
Soll, Sean, 10!
Solutions, 9, 106-65
sound function, 23
sound, creating, 88-9
Speech Centre, Getting the,
the solution, | 34-5
SpookiTalk, 71-3
Starfield mode, 22
starlings flying, 79
Starship Titanic logo, 5|
Staterooms:
First Class, 56, 82
introducing, 82
Second Class, 56, 75
introducing, 75
SGT, 56
introducing, 64-5
Steering Wheel, 165
Succ-U-Bus, 38-9, 51
controlling, 2
in SGT Lobby ITI, 116
in the Bilge Room, 133, 144
in the Parrot Lobby, 117, 118,
130, 132, 143
introducing, 51
tray, filling, 20
Super Gallactic Traveller Class, see
SGT Class
Sweet, Shorbert, 38-9
technical specifications, | |
Text to Speech, 70
The Bottom of The Well, 141
Titania Awakened, 99
the solution, 158-9
Titania:
animating, 60
Brain Pieces of, inserting, 99
Brain of, 98
Titania's Chamber, 57, 151, 156, 158
final visit, 98-9
glass doors of, 160
introducing, 57
on plan, 114, 122, 126, 128, 134,
136, 148, 156, 158
Titania's Head, 57
introducing, 57
positioning Olfactory Centre, 74
Titania's Mouth:
inserting, 99
obtaining, 94-5
Titania's Nose:
inserting, 99
Titanic Titillator, 78, 78, 136
getting hold of ingredients for, 78-
86, | 36-141
Top of The Well, 56, 125
emerging at, 59
introducing, 53
on plan, 124, 136
TY, HIE, 122
Channel 2, 54
Channel 4, 54
in First Class Stateroom, 82
Channel 5, 54
controlling, 21, 54-5
turning on, 19, 65
upgrading:
to First Class, 81-2
to Second Class, 59, 65
uplighter, 55
and hose, 95-7
VelociText, 70-|
virtual navigation, |60-5, 162-5
Vision Centre, 141
Getting the, the solution, | 36-41
obtaining, 78-86
reaching it, 136
volume levels, setting, 23
Watson, Linda, 71
Well Shaft, 56
introducing, 56
Williams, Jason, 71, 73
Your Lovely Home, introducing, 44-5,
45

Plans of the Ship
Titania's
Chamber
Ball Room
(Parrot Lobby)
Central Dome
Grand Axial
Music Room
Titania's
Canal
First Class
Figure Head
First Class
Restaurant
Promenade Deck
zene
eee vs ee eer
rrr eee. St
Paccscnndp nnn aee neon enone eee
eeenal ae
SSS
Embarkation Lobby
BS
Bridge
Arboretum
First Class
B
Grand Axial Canal Second Class
Art Galleries
Second Class
Super Galactic Traveller Class
Bilge Room
Service Elevator

Plans of the Ship:
Embarkation Lobby
Pellerator
Sculpture Chamber
Arboretum
Bridge
Central Well/Dome
Bar
Music Room
First Class Grand Axial Canal
Second Class Grand Axial Canal 
Ball Room
Creators Chamber
Promenade Deck
First Class Restaurant
Titania's Chamber
Rooms: First Class, Second Class, & Super Galactic Traveller Class

STARSHIP TITANIC SPECIFICATION
CLASS: 1a
PROPULSION UNIT: Higgs Old Faithful
BEAM: 1.7 enorms
INTELLIGENCE: Klein und Moebius Gdel
SPAN: 1.3 enorms
CREW/PASSENGER RATIO: 1:1
SPEED: Very very fast indeed
Nav: Kennigator

At the center of the galaxy an Unknown Civilization is preparing for the
launch of the greatest, most gorgeous, most technologically advanced
spaceship ever builtthe Starship Titanic.
As the fabulous craft eases away from the construction dock,
trailing shrouds of rather fetching pink taffeta, millions of onlookers
gasp in awe. Picking up speed, the Titanic sways a
little, wobbles a bit, veers wildlyand undergoes SMEF (Spontaneous
Massive Existence Failure). In just ten seconds, the whole stupendous enterprise is over.
Well, not quite. The Starship Titanic makes one tiny unscheduled
stop before heading off into hyperspaceto fetch you.
And if you want to get home, youre going to need Starship
Titanic: The Official Strategy Guide. Its the most comprehensively,
exhaustively, completely and utterly official guide available.

NO OTHER GUIDE HAS:
= SOLUTIONS so complete we despise you for needing to use them!
= HINTS so subtle you've got to be a bit of a smart-ass to understand them!
= DESCRIPTIONS of natural language parsing engines and objectoriented
= UNCENSORED PHOTOS of DOUGLAS ADAMS in the VERY ACT OF WRITING!
= ILLUSTRATIONS from people who've won REAL OSCARS!
= INSIGHTS into the SECRET LIVES of PROGRAMMERS!
= NO-HOLDS-BARRED back stories to all the CHARACTERS!
Forget Riven. This may be the game that re-ignites the adventure genre!</officialguide>
</strategyguides>